---
title: "How the Philippines fell from its Industrialization Path"
# date: 2021-09-30
heading: How to get it back
date: 2022-03-30
description: "The Philippines fell from its Industrialization Path because of Diosdado Macapagal in 1962"
image: "/photos/objects/regicide.jpg"
author: Juan
draft: true
---



The whole problem is that K12 focuses on Constructivism and higher order learning (critical thinking) when the Catholic culture itself is dogmatic.

K12 works in the west because the West already removed their Catholicism. The Europeans got rid of Catholicism through their enlightenment which enshrined critical thinking.

That's why Trump can mock the pope. 

China and Japan has Confucianism which emphasizes test scores so they pass standardized tests but are not multi skilled. They can't even read English.

So the government has to be consistent with its goal and policy and culture.

If they want to keep Catholic dogma then they should go for rote memorization without multi skills and just have single skill such as in engineering. 

This is why Gatchalian wants to reduce core K12 subjects

If they want employability then they should drop both Catholicism and liberalism (2 extremes) and make more oppressive practical tests and problem solving. I.e. work becomes their religion.

Confucianism is the best at this because it forces you to obey your boss.

Islam is the worst because it mandates 5x prayer and fasting which reduces productivity.

This is why the US dropped its Department of Education to let each state decide what dogma it wants.

This whole thing exposed the flaw of copy pasting foreign policies instead of making native ones. It proves that colonialism is still here.

Gatchalian's ploy seems to be to ask for more funding without knowing that if you fund junk you still get more junk