---
heading: Book 1
linkTitle: Book 1
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


Tristan de Atayde was troubl’d at these Misfortunes, which were almost Several Actions. under his Eyes; tho’ he wanted not for others nearer, for the People of Ternate being now Masters of the Island, burnt all the new and old Towns, belonging either to themselves, or the Christians, and amongst others, those of Trutupalate, Calamata, and Isico, yet they met with brave Opposition in them all, and they cost much Blood. Twice our Men went out to Fight the Tydore Fleet, which came within sight of the Fort, and tho’ they both times retir’d Shatter’d, and well Beaten, the Barbarians had not much cause to Boast of their Victory, for Abundance of them were kill’d, and scarce any went off unhurt. The Confederates fitted out other numerous Fleets, wherewith they much Streightened the Christians in the Fort, till Antony Galvam arriv’d, who was at this time Sailing. But Relief came before, Don Stephen de Gama, sending a Galeon laden with Provisions and Ammunition to Ternate, under the Command of Simon Sodre. The Galeon arriv’d safe, and with it the Support of those Disconsolate People. They took Heart, and ventur’d to go abroad, spreading themselves about the Island, and going into the Woods, met with ruin’d Buildings, the remains whereof still smoked, and when it was Dark, they observ’d the high Flames on the Mountains. However they made Incursions upon the Barbarians and throughout all the Islands there were hourly Engagements, either with the Christian Inhabitants, or the Soldiers of the Forts; and at Sea they heard the Martial Musick, which Sounded whilst they Sail’d, or Fought Manfully, and at that time was dreadful. [45]

In the mean while Captain Alvarado, a Spanish Gentleman, sent by Ferdinand Cortes to Ternate, that the Valour he had shown in those Parts, serving Spaniards at the Papuas. God and his King, might not lie idle, discover’d the Islands of the Papuas, and fought those Barbarians with Resolution, tho’ the Portuguese Histories assign the Honour of this Discovery to Don George de Meneses who arriv’d at them in the Year 1526, as we have seen. The great Commander Alvarado also Discover’d other Islands, call’d Gelles, in one Degree of North Latitude, and East from Ternate, 125 Leagues from Batochina. The Natives of those Islands are like those of the Moluccos in Colour, Habit, and Customs, differing only in Language, which is peculiar to themselves.

Antony Galvam sail’d from Malaca with the proper Monson, with Galvam Fights at Sea. the Men, and all Necessaries to fight, and settle Colonies. When he was past the Island Borneo, and the ridges or Rocks which lie under Water, in sight of that Coast, as F. Marta, the Jesuit, writes to the Governor Gomez Perez, and appears by his Papers, in Sight of Malaca he Discover’d a great Fleet of Carcoas, and other Chinese Ships, with Sails made of Canes, and Palm-Tree Leaves wove together. He was soon satisfy’d, that they were the Auxiliaries which had joyn’d the Janguas of Tydore and Catabruno, who, with the expell’d King of Ternate, were Cruzing to meet the Portugueses, or Spaniards, that should come into their Seas. Galvam order’d his Men to be in a Readiness, to clear his Guns, and prepare all Things, doing the Duty of a Commander, and of a Soldier. The Enemy drew up in three Lines, each of its particular Nation, as if the Portugueses had many Ships. He was himself in the Trading Galeon, and with it a Pink, and another small Vessel, wherein, among the Marry’d Men, and Families unfit for that Service, there were some few that could take up Arms. The Infidels drew near, but without Artillery, the Gilolo Archers let fly a great number of Arrows upon our Men, and then one Line shearing off, the other discharg’d, the Air resounding, being peirc’d by the Darts, and Calabays, or Staves hardned at the Fire. Galvam not regarding the Danger, tho’ at first he defended himself with Fights and Planks; when he thought they had spent most of those flying-Weapons, among which they fir’d some Muskets, he began to play his great Guns, tearing their Vessels, and destroying the Men. He Sunk a considerable number, and Took several, because they fought disorderly, relying, as it were a Land-fight, on the Multitude of their Soldiers, as ours did on their Valour, and Experience. But Galvam, whose Business it was to get to Ternate, held on his Voyage, and arriv’d Arrives at Ternate. there as he desir’d. His Men landed in that dismal Solitude, among Smoke and Ruins. The Joy of those who were in the Fort, and the extraordinary Relief, coming quite unhop’d for, were an Encouragement to them all. The Clergy came out to receive him, the Soldiers shouting amidst the Divine Hymns, confounding the Procession, and their Satisfaction. It was a Pleasure to behold, and they gazed on him as a Deliverer sent from Heaven. Tristan de Atayde resign’d his Post, and Antony Galvam took Possession, enquir’d into the Nature of the Confederacy, and the Fame of his Arrival being spread Abroad, Things began to mend. To this Purpose he arrested Tristan de Atayde, and afterwards sent him to Goa. He had before sent Messengers to the Queen, to acquaint her with his Arrival, [46]and the End of it, which was to serve her, and retrieve all the Mischiefs an inordinate Desire of Revenge had occasion’d. In the mean while he began to repair the City, the Colonies, Churches, Keys, and Houses, distributing those Families he had brought with him. Nor did he neglect Husbandry, but planted Vines brought from Portugal, which he soon saw grown up into substantial Vinyards. He deliver’d to the Clergy the new Constitutions drawn up by Cardinal Henry, afterwards the last K. of the House of Portugal. He offer’d Peace to all that would comply, sent Religious Men to inculcate to those who liv’d like Outlaws, the Love of their Country, its re-establishment, and how dishonourable it was to them to make choice of a Life like that of wild Beasts, only for a cruel Satisfaction.

Strength of the Natives. The Queen, who not to speak of her natural Fierceness, expected to see her Son restor’d, and set at Liberty, and to drive away the Portugueses, would not give Ear to any Accommodation. The greatest Burden of the War lay then upon Tydore, where the Confederate Kings, with the deposed Dayalo, a most Fierce Man, gather’d above Fifty Thousand Fighting Men; but they had not yet enclosed that City with a Wall and Ditch, being satisfy’d with having built a Fort upon high Rocks, whence they spread abroad to pick up the Fishermen, and other Portugueses that went out from Ternate to get Provisions, and thence they infested that dangerous Coast. Galvam fearing lest the Prolonging of the War should reduce him to the former difficulties, sent other Messengers to treat of Peace, and perswade those obstinate Kings, to Publish an Oblivion of all past Wrongs, without taking Notice of the late engagement, offering them mighty Presents, to purchase Commerce at the Price of them. They being puffed up with some good Success, and their mighty Power; would not hearken to any Proposals Peace; but on the contrary, as Maffæus Writes, they return’d an Answer very abusive to the Portugueses. Galvam imploring the Assistance of Heaven, so managed the Affair, that it was look’d upon as amazing, even by such as view Things impartially. Nor would it be credible, unless comfirm’d Galvam sails over to Attack them. by other Enterprizes of his suitable to this. He had only four Tall Ships, and a few smaller Vessels in the Port; these he speedily form’d into a Squadron, putting in 400 Men, 170 of them Portugueses, the rest to make up the Number, Slaves, and the common sort of Ternate. He left Tristan de Atayde with some Men to defend the Fort, and secure Sultan Aerio, and sail’d away himself for Tydore, without meeting any Enemy, the reason of it not known, and lay by in a safe Place, about a Musket-shot from that Island. Being come to an Anchor, he took a full View of the Multitude that guarded the Shores, considering the Nature of the Country, and Situation of the City. Having called a Council of War, he resolv’d to Storm the Fort on the high Rock, then little regarded, the Confederates thinking themselves safe. He made a Speech to them in plain Terms, without any Rhetorical Ornaments. These are the same People, said he, we have so newly Vanquish’d, to restore whom to the Liberty they desire, would be a matter of small moment, did they when possessed of it allow the Freedom of preaching the Gospel. This is the Cause we are imbark’d in. Who then can doubt of Victory, or not wish to Die for the obtaining of it? As these Enemies are the same we Defeated, so are we the same Victors; so that I need not have Recourse to Foreign Examples, to encourage you. Their Disobedience and Restlessness is of a long standing; it will be but reasonable that our Arms [47]add one Victorious Day to so many Turbulent Years, that so we may lay the Ax to the Root of Rebellion. They call us Tyrants; that does not at all trouble me; because after the Victory, we shall have the Opportunity of dispelling that Slander by our Moderation.

They would not suffer Galvam to put an end to his Speech, all of them The manner of the Attack. pressing earnestly to Fight, and he resolving to make himself Master of the Rock, as he had contriv’d, pick’d out 120 Portugueses, and made out 300 from among the Rest, leaving the Remainder to secure the Ships, and keep the Enemy in Play, if they should attack them; making show of a greater Number, by appearing in several Places, and shouting, by which such as fear are easily imposed upon. In the mean while, Galvam having taken a Native of Tydore, and oblig’d him to serve for a Guide, set out at the fourth Watch in the Night with his Men, through by-ways remote from the City, over-grown with Brambles, and scarce practicable, and with the greatest silence he could came to the Top of the Mountain. The Portugueses had march’d the greatest Part of the Way by the first Dawn of Day, and resting them a little from the Fatigue, descry’d the Enemy’s shining Helmets and their Feathers on them. Galvam then beginning, all the rest raised the Cry, To Arms, to Arms. The Confederates, with Horrid Shouts, which resounded on the Rocks, and in the Woods, made ready for their Defence, notwithstanding the surprize; but soon perceived they should fall a Prey to our Men. The Fight began, and King Dayalo, enrag’d for that he had been depos’d, appear’d the foremost with some Troops, to secure the Passes, and advanced to meet the Portugueses in a Plain. They avoided him not, and both Parties mixing, much Blood was spilt. Dayalo was visible by his bright Helmet, adorn’d with Variety of standing high Feathers, King of Ternate Kill’d. and his Body cover’d with a Steel Coat of Mail, brandishing with both Hands a Lance, as like a small Yard of a Ship, and charging with desperate Fury; but happ’ning to rush in among our Pikes and Musketiers, unadvisedly, he receiv’d several Wounds on all Sides, and fell down raging. He was wonderful strong, and started up immediately; concealing his Wounds and Pain, and beginning a fresh Charge in the first Ranks, for fear of discouraging his Men. He Fought a considerable Time; but not being Dress’d, and the Action causing the Blood to run the faster, his Eye sight fail’d him, and he dropt a second Time, saying to his Guards, Move hence as fast as you can, and carry me carefully that the Dogs, so he call’d the Portugueses, may not have the Satisfaction of cutting my Body in Pieces. His Soldiers did so, not without great Danger; and he soon after he had been carry’d off, gave up his haughty Soul. His Forces daunted by this Accident, turn’d their Backs, hiding themselves among the Rocks and Brambles, The Indians routed. throwing down their Arms, and getting off through almost inaccessible Ways. Others return’d to the City, and meeting some Troops that march’d to their Assistance, made them return another Way. The Portugueses follow’d the Chace, killing such as fled, and Galvam came to the Fort, with the Loss of only one Slave. This Victory, which happen’d on the Feast of St. Thomas, the Apostle, in the Year 1537, humbled the Pride of the Confederates; was ascrib’d to the Intercession of that Apostle, and they observ’d a solemn Thanksgiving. The Fort was fired with good Advice, for the Citizens and Traders, seeing the Flames so near, abandon’d [48]their Houses, and departed the City with the flying Multitude. Galvam was now coming down from the Hill, having drawn together his Men, and form’d them into small Bodies, with sound of Trumpets and Singing, to make his Victorious Entry into that City, now void of Defendants, and full of Wealth. Considering that the Avarice of the Victorious Soldiers spur’d them on to take Possession of that inestimable Booty, for all the Tydore burnt. Merchants had brought their Effects to Tydore, as the safest Place. Galvam order’d to set Fire to the Houses, all which were consum’d with their harmless Treasure, in Sight of those who had hop’d to be Masters of it; only the Provisions being providentially sav’d.

Of the People of Tydore as many were taken as did not in Time save themselves by Flight; as also a Junk in the Port, and several other small Vessels. The Enemies afterwards perish’d in other smaller Actions. The daunted King, hasted Home to secure their own Lands, disolving the Confederacy, and being sufficiently warn’d, gave Ear to, and Peace concluded. embrac’d Proposals of Peace; taking leave of him of Tydore, and agreeing with Galvam, whose Vertue and Discretion gain’d so much upon Cachil Rade, that King’s Brother, that he came to a Conference with him and concluded a Peace upon certain Conditions. The King of Tydore oblig’d himself to restore Galvam the Cannon; not to assist the Enemies of Portugal; not to permit the Clove to be dispos’d of into any other Hands than the Portuguese Officers; and to sell it as was usual at Ternate. Galvam went over next to subdue Gilolo, and the other Kings, all which he compass’d successfully. The Queen also submitted, either on Account of the King of Tydore’s Falshood, or that, as she said, she grew weary of the War, or else because the depos’d King was kill’d. Catabruno was appeas’d by Galvam’s good Behaviour, and accepted of Conditions, among which the chiefest was, that Galvam should set Sultan Aerio at Liberty. Thus the Confederacy was dissolv’d, and the Maluccos laying down Arms, submitted again. Provisions were furnish’d as before, and the Crops, and Trade of Spice were restor’d.

Sultan Aerio King of Ternate. Sultan Aerio attended by the Christians and Gentiles, Dancing, and making other demonstrations of Joy, went from the Fort to his Palace, where he remain’d with his Guard, and Family. Before he Marry’d, tho’ he never wanted for Concubines, he in Person took a Progress to the principal places in his Dominions of Ternate, Moutil, and Machian. Those in the Fort attended and assisted him, together with the Sangiacks, who went all about that Archipelago, first on that side they call Del Moro, that is towards Batochina, and is distant from the Moluccos 60 Leagues Northward, beginning at the Isles of Doe, two Leagues to the Point of Bicoe. All these are Inhabited by Wild People.

Batochina, that is Gilolo describ’d. Batochina is 250 Leagues in Compass, and Subject to two Kings, which are those of Gylolo, and Lolada. This last is Ancienter than all those of the Moluccos, or in those Seas, and formerly was the most Powerful; but now the Weakest. The Inhabitants of the North part of Batochina are Savage, without any King, Laws, or Towns, living in Deserts. Those on the East-side have populous Towns, on the Sea Shore; and tho’ they speak several Languages, yet they understand one another. This Coast they call’d Morotia, that is, Land Moor. The other Islands opposite are call’d Morotay, [49]that is, Sea-Moor, and all those Isles breed deceitful, brutal and dastardly Men. Only the City Moncoya is Warlike. It ever wanted Laws, Weights, Measures, Coin, Gold, Silver, and all other Metals, and a King; but it is overstock’d with Provisions, Arms, Idols, and Devils speaking in them. The Women Till the Land. Each of these Towns is Govern’d by a Magistrate chosen by the People; they pay him no Taxes, but have Regard to his Descent. The Molucco Kings conquer’d them, and every one kept what he could get; the better part belongs to him of Ternate, and less to the King of Tydore, whose Dominions were enlarg’d by the Power of Spain. They went on to establish their Possessions among the Papuas, or Papous, East from the Moluccos, being Islands little resorted to, because many of them are all encompass’d with Flats and Shoals. The Natives of them are Black, like the Cafres; they wear their Hair wound about in large curl’d Papuas, or Papous. Locks, their Visages lean and ugly. The Name of Papuas in their Language signifies Blacks, being a stern People, enur’d to Labour, and fit for any piece of Treachery. All their Islands are subject to Kings, and abound in Gold, which they do not Transport, because no Man lays up any more of it than is us’d in their Ornaments. Among these Black-men there are some as White and fair as the Germans; if these go out in the Sun, they are struck blind, tho they do not look at it. Those in Spain are call’d Albinos; yet some of them are strong, and can behold any Object. Among these Papuas there are many deaf. As to the Extent of this Country, if we may believe the Accounts of Spanish Pilots, who have sail’d that way, these Islands run along a vast Continent, which terminates at the Streights of Magellan. These Kings entertain Friendship with Ternate, whither they sent Embassadors, and as much as was here subject to the Moluccos, had no Share in the desperate Fury of the League. So did those of Celebes to the Westward, being many notable Islands, the great Island Celebes it self, as also Mindanas; so those of Bisaya, abounding in Iron; Mascaga, and Masbate, which have much Gold, as well as Mindanas; that of Sologo, and others producing Provisions, Spice, Sanders, Eaglewood, Other Islands. Cinnamon, Camphire, Tortoshell, Ginger, and Long Pepper. Some of these Islands are subject to the King of Borneo, others to those of Tydore and Bachian, but the most to him of Ternate. The People are generally treacherous; many of them go naked, painting their Bodies in Falcage, and other Figures; their Hair long, hanging on their Backs, or else knotted, and cut short over the Forehead, like our Peasants; their Faces large; their Teeth well shap’d and black; and their Ears bor’d. The Natives of Celebes. Celebes are filthy, and vile in their Behaviour; the Æquinoctial passes over their Island, which is full of little Towns; a whole Race living in every House. On their Walls they hang the Hair of those they have kill’d in War; and the greatest number of them is most Honourable. There are among them several sorts of Monstrous Productions. One of these is a Tree bearing a vast Head, the shade whereof kills any Man that lyes down under it on the West-side, unless he immediately lye down on the East-side; the same shade at only a Yard distance being an Antidote against its opposite Malignity. In these Towns there are horrid Stews of Sodomy; tho there are no such at Ternate; but they have gone as far as Amboyna, which lyes South of it. Among the Moluccos there are many Islands subject [50]to their own Chiefs, full of excellent Waters, and delightful Banks. Formerly they were free, afterwards conquer’d by the Kings of Ternate and Tydore; against whom they also rebell’d, and submitted to the Queen of Japara, and many Christian Towns were subject to the Portugueses. They yield above 2000 Hundred Weight of Cloves Yearly; which the Jaos are Masters of, none being to obstruct them; they go over and Barter, and carry it away in their Junks. We speak elsewhere of their Fertility. Our Relations tell us, they produce a fort of Reeds, or Canes, above fifty fathom long, and no thicker than a mans little finger. South from Amboyna lye the Islands of Banda; and about 300 Leagues to the Eastward; some affirm, there is one which is all over an entire Mine of Gold, and the Natives not above a Yard high. If this be so, and these the true Pigmies, who will look upon the Battels mention’d in Homer’s 3d Iliad, betwixt them and the Cranes, as Fabulous. Those scatter’d Dominions were again united and submitted to Sultan Aerio, whose Marriage Solemnities, Building of Masques, Publick Festivals, and other Works of Peace, we must pass over in silence, as not proper for our purpose, they being only a pleasing sort of Digressions.

Mezquita Governs at Ternate. The Kings of Portugal sent several Commanders in Chief to Ternate, and last in the Year 1570; James Lopez de Mezquita, who had commanded on the Molucco Seas, took Possession of the Fort. In his Time Sultan Aerio, a courteous and affable Man, continu’d in Subjection to Portugal, valuing himself upon being true to his Word in all his Actions. Nevertheless, there wanted not some ill-meaning Persons, who mislik’d his Government, and pretended that he did not exercise his Power legally. They said, he had given way to those Vices, into which luxurious Princes are wont to fall; those being generally the Fruits of a long Peace. They fancy’d, he retained the Memory of past Tragedies; and particularly his Mother’s inhuman End, and therefore persecuted our Religion; tho at the Pretences to destroy King Aerio. same Time the Memories of those Days do not charge him with any Temporal Disobedience, or want of Fidelity; but they rather compar’d him to Massinissa, King of Numidia; and say the Portugueses ought to have respected him, as the Romans did the other. The Commander hearing of those Abuses, and fearing greater might ensue, some Religious Men encreasing his Jealousie, he endeavour’d to redress them by Friendly Admonitions, and other Contrivances. Those Methods had no effect on him, for he answer’d, he was in his own Dominions, where, without offence to the Portuguese Sovereignty, he might live as he pleas’d. Mezquita resolving to try harsher means, since the others did not at all move the King, nor make him uneasie, as relying on his Innocency; began to deprive him of his Revenue, and the Income of the Spice; threatning also, that he would, in all other Respects, execute the last Will made by his Brother Tabarija, wherein he appointed the King of Portugal for his Heir; or at lest would treat him so like an inferior Person, that he should scarce be able to assume the Name of King; for such is the Punishment they are lyable to, who do not observe that Decorum which was inviolable in their Ancestors.

Cachil Babu, Son to Sultan Aerio, taking a Progress about this Time, through his Father’s Islands, a Subject came to complain to him against certain Portugueses, who had taken away his Daughter; for which fault [51]he order’d them all to be kill’d, as if they had been accessary to the ravishing of the Maid. He had no Directions, nor so much as the consent of King Aerio for this exorbitant Command, which took no effect. On the contrary he afterwards so generously resented it, that he order’d the Prince to be seiz’d, and would have punish’d him severely, had he not been hindred by those the wrong was offer’d to. This plain Demonstration was The Portugueses seize and send him to Goa. not sufficient to divert the Portuguese Commander from imputing the Sons Fault to the Father, contrary to all Reason and Likelihood. All discreet Methods us’d by well-meaning Persons to reconcile them two, failing; James Lopez by his King’s Authority, which generally is most unreasonable, the farther it is from the Prince, from whom it is deriv’d, presum’d to imprison the Sultan; being dragg’d away from a Pleasure-House, where he was passing the Heat of the Day, among his Women; His Subjects lov’d him, and their Resentment for this wrong was proportionable to their Affection; nor did the Portugueses approve of the Fact. The Commander perceiving that all Men were against him, and that after all Enquiries and Examinations, the King’s Cause still appear’d the better, and his Fidelity was more visibly made out, he gave him his Liberty, to the great Satisfaction of his Kingdoms, which were attentive to the Event; but upon Condition he should go to Goa to clear himself, where he expected they would cut off his Head, upon the Informations he would send against him. The King set out, and before he came to Malaga, the Viceroy The Viceroy acquits him. writ to him, begging he would return to his Kingdom, for he was fully convinc’d of his Innocence, and promis’d to punish the Causer of those Troubles; but at that Time, for some Considerations, was satisfy’d with reproving him. The K. returning to Ternate, the Commander was sent Prisoner to Goa, and had been more severely punish’d; but that Fortune preserv’d him, to be an Instrument of the loss which has lasted till our Days.

Within a Year after his Imprisonment he was restor’d to his Command in Ternate, where be again practic’d against that King; for there are some Pretended Reconciliation. Dispositions which never part with the Jealousies they have once conceiv’d. Ternate was as it were the Metropolis in Religious matters, and King Aerio had never offer’d any Affront to us either in Spirituals or Temporals, for which Reason there never wanted some grave Persons in his Court. These Zealously reconcil’d them two, and that perfectly, as to outward Appearance, and that their renew’d Amity might be lasting, the King assur’d the Commander upon Oath, according to his Sect, that he would never privately harbour the least Jealousie of him; but before he admitted of any, would discover it to him, that so he might either receive, or make Satisfaction; to the end no Accidents might revive any Mistrusts. The Falshood of Mezquita. Commander made the King the same solemn Promise, both of them being thus pacify’d, and in the Opinion of all those who mediated betwixt them, so Friendly, that none could imagine such perfect Amity could ever be dissolv’d. But there being nothing less permanent among Men than Reconciliations, the Portuguese Commander reassuming the Hatred which never was extinct, or perhaps so much as lay’d aside, resolv’d to destroy Sultan Aerio when only five Days were elaps’d since the Re-establishment of their Friendship sworn to on both sides. This could not be kept so private, as not to come to the Sultan’s Ears; but the Consideration that he was a King, [52]his own Sincerity, and the fresh Reconciliation, made him think he was secure. But if the Nature of Man be such as not to forgive when it has done a Wrong, what can be less secure than injur’d Innocence? The Commander feigns himself Sick, and sends to desire the King, that since he is not able to wait on him in his Palace, he will be pleas’d to honour him with a Visit in the Fort, there to confer with his Highness about some important Affairs which concern the King of Portugal, his Master, and are not fit to be communicated to any other. All the Answer the King return’d, was to go himself to Visit the Sick Man, tho’ he had Information better grounded than on bear Surmises, that Martin Antonio Pimentel, the Commanders Nephew, had Orders to murder him, as soon as ever he came into the Fort. Aerio’s Innocent Bravery. He could not prevail upon himself to believe a Treacherous Design; so far does Innocence prevail over a generous Soul. But when he saw that at the Gate, they stopp’d his Guards, the Sangiacks and Cachiles, that attended him, he then began to be convinc’d of the Villany, yet went on without being disorder’d, and showing an undaunted Countenance. And tho’ he could not forbear dropping some Tears, when he took leave of his Sons, however he presently compos’d his Countenance, so that he was not at all dismay’d, tho’ in the Commanders Nephew’s Looks he saw visible Tokens of his Unkles Commission. He would have complain’d to the Commander of the Disrespect of those who stopp’d his Attendance, but they would not suffer him to go on. The Mask being now laid aside, and the true Design appearing, in Violence he call’d out to the Sangiacks, but the Gate was shut against him and them. Pimentel came up to him with a Naked Ponyard, and begg’d his Pardon like an Executioner. The King, without showing any Surprize, or Disorder, Bid him consider what he was going to do; for there were many left to revenge his Death, besides his Sons and Subjects, all the Kings of the Archipelago, as well the Sovereigns who were in Alliance, as those who ow’d Fealty to the Crown of Portugal. This Instance, said he, will make them dread every Capricious Humour of a Commander in chief. If still that Jealousie survies, which has so often been prov’d groundless, I will deliver my self up to the King of Portugal; and if my Death be of such Consequence to you, yet respite the Execution but a little, for at my Age, Time will soon perform what your Swords are to do. They He is murder’d. now began to fall upon him, and he seeing a Brass Cannon, on which were the Arms of Portugal, clasping his Arms about it, said, Christians, at least show some respect to these Arms; for you kill a King that has paid the greatest Deference to your Crown. This last Testimony of his Innocence was of no Force to appease those Murderers; though formerly in Rome, the embracing the Statues of the Emperors was sufficient to deliver Slaves from being punish’d by their Masters. It may be a Question whether his Soul was sav’d; for there are those who affirm, he intreated the Murderer to permit him to be Baptiz’d; who answering, It was then too late, without granting his Request, or any Respite, ran furiously upon that Antient Prince, who made no Resistance, and stabb’d him in several Places. They carry’d the Body into a Vault. The King’s Kindred and Servants heard the Noise, and suspecting the worst; went away in great Disorder, to the City, where there was already a confused Rumour of what had happen’d, and being Distracted, ran shrieking about the Streets, where nothing was [53]to be heard but Weeping, Threats, Complaints and Disorder.

The Principal Queen, with the Kings other Wives, and Slaves, his Sons, and Brothers, laying a side all State, came out of the Palace, already surrounded by the Multitude, in Confusion and Dispair, and being follow’d by most of the Portugueses, who no less abhorr’d the Fact, ran to the Fort, crying out to let them see their King, as still doubting of what they heard. Mezquita’s Inhumanity. The Commander appear’d in Armour on the Wall, and said, They should see him immediatly; and then came up a Soldier, bringing the Kings Head with the Royal Turbant on it. After him came others, with his Arms, Legs, and Body cut into small pieces, all which they hung upon the Battlements in the sight of his People. Afterwards they Salted them, as if the perpetuating of the Wrong had been requisite. This was what most provok’d the injur’d People, who no longer able to behold so inhumane a Spectacle, and being beside themselves, and fearing more Mischief, return’d with their Family. The Sons out of Respect to their Fathers Body, went away from Ternate to several Islands, tho’ in Reality they departed to excite others by their Presence, representing the Hideousness, and Horror of the Fact; and to dispose their Revenge. For the present they were satisfied with sending to complain of the Commander in Chief.

Complain’d of at Goa. Their Embassador arriv’d at Goa clad in White, which is the Mourning of the Molucco Islands, and upon the Faith of his Credentials, acquainted the Viceroy with the whole matter; proving the Innocency of the Murder’d Sultan; representing the Wrong done to, and the Sorrow of his Family, and Kingdoms, who so passionately Lov’d him; and beseeching him, in the name of them all, to Right them against the Man, who with the Power and Authority of the Portuguese Arms, had Violated the publick Faith and the Laws of Nature. The Viceroy gave him a favourable hearing, tho’ by that Time the matter was otherwise represented at Goa, at least among the Portuguese Nation. They said, That King Aerio going to visit the Commander False pretences of the Portugueses. in Chief, Martin Antonio Pimentel, went in with him, and they contended in Words upon some Point, when the Portuguese answering him angrily, they fell to their Weapons, and the King was kill’d in the Quarrel. They added, That he was Advis’d so to do, by some of our Religious Men, who were offended at the Persecution of the Christians, and the Obstructing of the King of Portugal’s Service. Pimentel made his Defence with the Original Letters, of those who perswaded him to commit the Fact, and who afterwards sav’d him. However the Viceroy did not Reject the Plaintifs; but promis’d to Right them; and to shew that he design’d them farther satisfaction than a bare Promise, he sent away the necessary Supplies for the Security of the Fort of Ternate, and Nunno Pereyra de la Cerda, a Gentleman of Courage, and the necessary Sagacity to succeed the other in a Post where all things were in Confusion. He also writ to King Sebastian of Portugal, acquainting him with the Death of King Aerio; how Cruelly and Unjustly he had been kill’d; what a Revolution there was cause to fear it might produce; whom he had sent to succeed Mezquita; the Orders he had to Secure him, as also Pimentel, if he could find him.

Pereyra succeeds Mezquita. Nunno Pereyra arriv’d at Malaco with the Molucco Embassador, whence, at the proper Season, they Sail’d to Ternate, where as soon as they Landed, order was taken for Correcting the Insolency of those in the Garrisons, who [54]robb’d, and obstructed Trade. When he had settled these Affairs, he seiz’d the late Commander in Chief, James Lopez; but did not punnish him there, in the sight of those who had been wrong’d, which would have appeas’d them. The new Commander sollicited the Kings Sons to return to Ternate, and endeavour’d to give them, and the Kingdom Satisfaction. He easily convinc’d them, that the Publick was no way guilty of their Fathers Death, but only the Commander Mezquita, who should be severely punish’d. That He fawns. he deliver’d them the Kings Body, to be Bury’d with due Honour. That they should settle the Succession, offering it to Cachil Guarate, Aerio’s Eldest Son. He told them, the King of Portugal did not send his Commanders to be Enemies, but Protectors of the Royal Family and State of Ternate, and therefore they should make use of his Arms, as their own. They return’d apparent Thanks for what Pereyna did, and being indifferently satisfy’d with his Promises, took the Kings Body. A few Months after, on the Day appointed for the Barbarous Obsequies, Embassadors from the neighboring Kings, and Kingdoms landed at the City, who all repair’d to the Palace, clad in White, with the dead Kings Sons, and Brothers, the Sangiacks and Soldiers, and the Chiefest of them, going into the Room where the Coffin was before the Mourners, who are Officers of the Grave, began their Lamentations Revenge vow’d. and Cryes, they all swore upon the dead Body, to take a Revenge suitable to the Wrong; but because this Resolution requir’d a more deliberate Preparation, they suspended it for a Year. It is reported, that Heaven anticipated them within that time, punishing Pimentel, striking him to the Heart with the Disease call’d Berber, whereof he dy’d swelling up, and raving.

Assembly of the Indians to consent. The Funeral Rites being perform’d, the Prince took leave of Nunno Pereyra, to go over to the Island Ires, where they have a most stately Country-House, and the principal Mosque. There they all met on pretence of Diverting themselves after their Sorrow, tho it was now almost two Years since the occasion of it happened. The Cachilas and Sangiacks repair’d thither under the same Colour, and without loosing any Time, they proposed the Uniting the Forces of their Kingdoms, and shaking off the Portuguese Yoke. What shall we, said they, value the Portugueses, if once we come to be sensible of our own Strength? What can we Fear, or not Dare to attempt? The Portugueses value him who Robs most, and is guilty of the greatest Crimes and Enormities. The forcing away of our Product, their one lewd Pleasures, and our Wrongs, are Occasion for them to make War; ours are our Country, and the Defence of our Parents, our Wives, our Children, and our Liberty. It is necessary to expedite the Execution, because a Secret is not lasting among many, and in Affairs of this Nature, there is more Danger in Consulting, than even in Execution. We have been already too long in Confusion, without a Head. No Man contradicted; but neither Cachil Guarate, the Eldest of the Brothers, nor the Second, durst take upon them so difficult an Enterprize. Cachil Babre, the Third, undertok it, with the usual Ingagement, either to Conquer, or to Dye. They presently lifted him up, with general Applause, and his Election being made publick, the Kingdom easily submitted to him, through the desire of Revenge; tho’ according to the Custom of the Molucco Islands, as soon as the King has any Son born, they swear him his Successor, in his turn, and there was then no need [55]of any other Oath, yet they again swore to Cochil Babu. This done, they went out to their Mosque, in Procession, to offer Sacrifice. A Boy went foremost with a naked Sword on his Shoulder, and with the other Hand Sacrifice. leading a Kid, which was to be the Victim, with the little Horns Gilt. The Alcoran forbids Sacrifising; but these Islanders receive the Rites of Mahometanism so confus’dly, that with them they also retain those of their ancient Idolatry, and intermix the Ceremonies. He that conducts the Sacrifize, is, according to their Custom, follow’d by part of the Kings Soldiers, with their Pikes advanc’d, and after them goes one holding up on high a small Gold Vessel, or Pan, with burning Coals in it, the Frankincense they throw in Smoking. Next to him was the new King, over whose Head they always carry an Umbrello, made of Feathers of several Colours, in shape of a large Semicircle. The King was encompass’d by those Soldiers, that are given him by his Subjects by way or Acknowledgement, like the Turkish Janizaries. In this Order they came to the Mosque, at whose Gates, whensoever they are to enter, they find Kettles and Pots full of Water, to wash their Hands and Feet before they go in. As soon as the King was upon the Threshold the Musick play’d, and they spread Milk-white Carpets, as is the Custome: Kneeling on them, they mutter out their vain Prayers, bowing their Heads down to the Ground. In the midst of the Mosque stands a Pulpit, cover’d with white Cloth. Instead of a Bell, there hangs up the holy great flat Drum, which they beat with Sticks; tho each Mosque has a great Bell, without a Clapper, which they strike with a Stone, or piece of Iron, when requisite. All that hear it, of what Condition soever, repair to the Temple, with Pikes, Shields, Cymitars, and Muskets. The profane Sacrifice being ended, they conducted the new King to the Harbour; he went into his Carcoa, with his Family, and the other Sangiacks, and The King’s Carcoa. great Men, into many others. The King’s is so contriv’d, that there is a Gang-way all round it, made of Canes. There are two Slaves to each Oar; others do the Service of the Vessel, and near every one lies a Number of Arrows. Instead of Oars they use a sort of great Paddles, like Spoons, with which they also lade out the Water the Vessel takes in. On the upper part they make Musick with their Tabors, and Sounding-Basons of Metal, according to which they Row faster or slower, as we Dance to our Musick. In the same Place there are seven Brass Guns; a considerable number of Pikes advanc’d, longer than ours, and a Bed adorn’d with Quilts interwoven with Gold, and by it hung the King’s Helmet, Breast, and Back Plates. He sat, or lay on that rich Bed, the Servants of his Bed-Chamber Fanning him with a large Wing, made of various colour’d Feathers of the Birds that fly about his Islands; thus he Coasted about, the Sea and Shore resounding with Guns, Shouts, and Barbarous Instruments.

At the same time that they seem’d to be wholly taken up with Sports and Diversions, in the Island Ires, they Vow’d an irreconciliable Enmity War Proclaim’d. to the Portuguese Nation, with the same Solemnity as they had sworn Allegiance to their King; and this Secret having been inviolably observ’d, when the new K. thought convenient he caused it to be Publish’d throughout all his Dominions, which consists of seventy two Islands in that Archipelago, betwixt those of Mindanao, on the North; Bima and Corca on the [56]Dominions of Ternate. South; and the Continent of the Papuas, or Papous, otherwise call’d New Guinea on the East: The Inhabitants whereof pay him their Tribute in Gold, Amber, and Birds of Paradise; all which Provinces have been Usurped from other Kings, on whose Ruins his Pride is swollen so high, that he stiles himself in his own Language, Emperor of the Archipelago. In most of them there were at that Time some Christian Towns, Churches, and Preachers, and the Gospel was receiv’d in the eight principal Nations. Idolater and Mahometan Embassadours came from them all to acknowledge, and swear Fealty to Cachil Rabu. In this great Assembly the Desire of Revenge was made the Cause of Religion, and in it began the longest Persecution the true Faith has undergone in our Days. It will be therefore requisite, distinctly to describe the remote, and neighbouring Countries and Nations that carry’d it on; and the Strength, and standing Forces, Forces of the Kings of Ternate and Provinces. they have ready at all times upon any Occasion.

The sixteen greater Towns of Ternate furnish their K. with 3000 Arm’d Men; the Island of Montil, distant from it six Leagues South, 200; that of Machian, eight Leagues distant, 1500; that of Caioa four Leagues from Mechian, the same way, 300; those of Gazea, twelve Leagues from Caioa, 300; those of Xula, fifty Leagues from Ternate, 4000; those of Burro, seventy Leagues distant, 4000; those of Veramula eighty Leagues from Amboina, and are the same Number of Leagues in compass 50000; those of Buaro, and Manipa, lying betwixt those of Veranula and Burro, 3000; those of Na, Nolo, and New Guinea, which are many, and very populous, fifty Leagues East from Ternate, send no certain, but numerous Forces; that of Ires, where the King then was, 400; and pays Tribute in Amber, and Birds of Paradise. Those of Meaos and Tasure, on the North, 400. Those of Doe, distant thirty Leagues some way, 900. Those of Rao and Saquita, seventy Leagues North, 1000. The great Batochina, or Gilolo, four Leagues from Ternate, 10000. The large Island Matheo, contains several Kingdoms, thirty Leagues to the Westward, each of them subject to its own King, and all of them to him of Ternate; send him Arm’d Troops. Totole and Bool 6000 Men; Guayduda 7000; Gorontano and Iliboto, 10000; Tomine, 12000; Manado, 2000; Dondo, 700; Labague, 1000; Fulo, and Jaqua, 10000; Gape, Tobuquo, and Butu are all subject to him, and the number of their supplies is uncertain; but Sanguien and its King, 40 Leagues from Ternate, serve him with 3000 Men. This was not the standing Force, which without adding to it the uncertain number, nor the multitude of slaves, amounts to 120300 Men. This particular F. Martin sent to the Governor Gamez Parez, and the original was deliver’d to me. Since then, that Kings Power is increased, and because more Formidable, by reason of his Alliances with several Princes, entering Amity with some, and Oppressing others, and practising the Rules of Tyranny among them all, as Artfully as was formerly done by Greece, Rome, and Carthage. Of their Game, Fish, Rice, Sagu, and other Stores of Fruit and Spice, and the Royal Mines, we shall speak when the Subject in Hand requires it; and so of their Weapons, of which last it is to be observ’d once for all, that those they Dart, are all poison’d, and the Fire-Arms differ not from ours. [57]

For managing of this great Design, the King privately sent about his Brothers, Pereyra prepares his Defense. and Sangiacks; but so great an Army could not be contracted from such distant Parts, without being heard of by the Christians, and particularly Nunno Pereyra. He suspecting that the Desire of Revenge still prevail’d in the injur’d Parties, and that the first Effects of it would fall upon his Fort, tho’ the Sultan’s Murderer was not then in it, strengthned it proportionably to the Siege he expected. Prudence supplies the Place of Prophesy. The Fort was not then erected, which is since to be seen in Ternate, on a high Ground of difficult Ascent, next the Sea, and the Back of it defended by a Lake, next the Mountain; being three Miles distant from the first Fort: It was afterwards built to defend themselves against great Fleets; not satisfy’d with that they had before on the Plain, The Portuguese Fort. next the Sea, made of dry Stones, without Mortar; which being since improv’d in all Respects, is now built with Lime, the Walls a Yard and half thick, and Fifteen in Height; Forty in Length next the Sea, with a round Tower at each Angle, like the ancient Spanish Fortresses. Nunno Pereyra endeavour’d with all possible Diligence, to shut up in it the greatest Number he could of all the Christian Families, and to be in a Readiness to stand the Siege, which soon ensu’d. He sent Advice to India and Portugal of the Intelligence he had receiv’d, demanding Succours, as in a certain Danger; but it could never have come in Time; for some Part of those Forces being assembled in the Island Ires, the Rest staying on Botochina, in that Part which is properly call’d Gilolo, and is remote from the Portugueses, they there began to persecute Christianity by publick Decree.

The Apprehension of these Mischiefs, had much perplex’d all the Governours of those Provinces, because it was daily confirm’d by visible Proofs of an open Insurrection. James Lopez de Marquita was already kept Prisoner in the Fort of Benastarim at Goa, those confin’d, and the Viceroy expected Orders from Spain to dispose of him, and the Forces; because it was fear’d the King of Ternate might make use of the great Supplies which could be sent him from China; especially if that were certain which was then discoursed in Spain. It was reported, Project of abandoning the Philippine Islands. That the Council of State, observing that the Philippine Islands were rather an Expence, than an Advantage to the Crown, being many, and hard to be maintain’d, had propos’d to King Philip, to quit them, and withdraw the Court of Justice, and the Garrisons that defend them. They added the Example of the Chineses, who abandon’d them, tho’ they are such near Neighbours, and can relieve them with as much Ease, as if they were joyning to their Continent. That as Spain governs them, the Loss they occasion is considerable, without any Hopes that it can ever be alter’d for the better; a vast Quantity of Silver being sent thither from New Spain, both for the usual Expences, and to buy Commodities; that so all that Treasure is convey’d by the Hands of the Chineses into the Heart of those Dominions, render’d intractable by the Severity of their Laws, by Reasons for it. which they are trench’d in, as it were with Fortification, against all Commerce with Strangers. They alledg’d that a Monarchy dispers’d, and divided by so many Seas, and different Climates, could scarce be united; nor could humane Wisdom, by settled Correspondence, tye together Provinces so remov’d from one another by Nature. That these Arguments are not the Ofspring of Wit, but of Experience, and Truths obvious to the Senses. That all such as might be urg’d against them, were only grounded upon Honour, and full of a generous Sound, but difficult in the Execution; and therefore the best Expedient, was for the King to strengthen himself in Europe, where his Forces can be ready to meet all Dangers, without being expos’d to the Hazards of the Sea, and the Dominions of others. Each of these Arguments was so fully represented by the Officers of the Revenue, that the Proposal was thought worthy to be debated and consider’d; and had God permitted the King to exclude the Philippine Islands his Monarchy, leaving them expos’d to the first that would take Possession, the Moluccos had so far been strengthen’d, as to become unconquerable.

The same Thing has been propos’d at other Times, and in the Days of King Philip the IIId. who sticking to his Father’s Answer, has always rejected that [58]King Philip rejects it. mischievous Advice. That most prudent Monarch answer’d, That the Philippines should be maintain’d, in the same Manner they were, and the Court should be invested with more Authority, that Justice might prevail, for he laid the Stress of Government, on its being upright, and impartially administer’d. That in the same manner the Troops should be kept up there, and maintain’d out of the Revenues of New-Spain, or any other of his Kingdoms, since all the Treasures discover’d, or still hid in the Bowels of the Mines, ought to be apply’d to the Propagation His Reasons. of the Gospel. For what would the Enemies of Christ say, if they perceived that the Philippine Islands were left destitute of the true Light, and its Ministers to propagate it, because they did not produce rich Metals, and other Wealth, like the Rest of the fruitful Islands in Asia and America? That all the Power of Kings, ought to be subservient to this Sovereign End, as becomes Sons of the Church, and Promoters of the Apostolical preaching, which is continu’d by Succession. That since he had refused to mitigate the least Point of his Severity towards his Northern Subjects, or to grant them Liberty of Conscience; why should he remit any thing among Heathens, and Mahometans, which were the Harvest God had assign’d him, to enrich the Church with those Children, so remote? Thus the Project was put down, and this has always been the glorious Resolution, when mistaken Zeal, or worldly Interests have propos’d the quitting of those Dominions. This seems to have been a peculiar Providence of Heaven, which knew how soon they were all like to belong to the same Master, and that the Right and Conquests should be all United in his Person, the one being the Means to recover the other, as has been seen in our Days.

Product of Asia. King Philip was govern’d by this Religious Motive; but there were others urg’d by such as were acquainted with the Riches of Asia, which are chiefly Diamonds, Rubies, large and Seed Pearl, Amber-Greece, Musk, Civet, Camphir of Borneo and China, Vermillion, Coral, Quick-Silver, Copper, fine Muslins, and Calicoes of Cambaya and Bengala, Carpets, Coverlets, and fine Quilts. Persian Silks, Brocard, Ivory, Rheubarb, Cardamome, Cassia Fistula, Frankincense, Benjamin, Wax, China-Ware, Arguments against quitting the Philippines. Lake for dying, and Physick, Cloves, Mace, Gold, Silver, Medicinal Plants, Aloes, Eagle Wood, Calamba, Ebony, and very many more rare Trees, Drugs, Spices, and Ornaments. All this they said, Venice lost, when the Trade was remov’d to Portugal; and this same stir’d up the Sultan of Egypt, as well knowing therein consisted all substantial Wealth, to enter into a Confederacy with all the Kings of India; who were already alarm’d by the Portuguese Fleets; so that they at the common charge fitted out a Navy of Galleys, and other Vessels, in the Port of Suez furnish’d it with Cannon, and put aboard 3000 Mamelucks, besides a great Number of Venetian and Genoese Renegadoes. With this Power the Sultan enter’d India, in the Year 1508, and tho’ the King of Cambaya assisted him, he was vanquish’d by the Portugueses in the Port of Chaul. They urg’d, That at present these Riches are still more valuable, and that if the Trade of them were once brought into the Way of the Philippine Islands, it would save all the Dangers met with, by the way of Amboyna, Banda, Borneo, and the many Shoals about them, as also the many Storms those narrow Seas are subject to. For the Clove particularly was brought by the Portugueses, in their Trading Galeon, which goes from Goa to the Moluccos, to pay their Garrisons. In this Ship they every year carry’d away to Malaca and Goa, 24000 Quintals, or Hundred Weight of Cloves, little more or less. At those Ports it was dealt to Persians, Turks, Chineses, and Africans, so that scarce the third Part came to Europe. The King of Achem, in Sumatra, secur’d another Part, whence it was sent to Alexandria. All these Commodities, when they come to Malaca, pay eight per Cent. The Spice that comes into Spain is distributed into all the Kingdoms of Europe; and it might be easily contriv’d, say these People, to bring the greatest Part to Spain from the Philippine Islands; which would be one of the noblest Projects, that will be thought of for the improving of the Revenue, considering what a great Price Clove bears in Spain, and how cheap it is in the Molucco. This was the Opinion when those Islands belong’d to another Master, and it was no easie Matter to divert the Trade of Spice, and other Goods, from the usual India Voyage. Besides the Religious Men of the Orders of St. [59]Augustin and St. Dominick, had already propagated the Faith in those and other Islands, whence that which flourish’d, and advanc’d in Ternate and Tydore was Fed.

Cachil Babu sail’d with his Brothers, and a great Number of Vessels from Ires for Ternate, with much Joy, and forebodings of Victory; greater Forces continually joyning him, through the earnest Desire they had all of delivering those Parts from the Portuguese Domination. As soon as ever they arriv’d at Ternate, they landed, and immediately invested the Fort, which they call’d the Seat of Servitude. Portuguese Fort besieg’d. They assaulted the Houses of the Portugueses, and that so suddenly, that though they had Notice before, and lived in Fear, they scarce stood upon their Defence. Rage and Success made a more than Barbarous Havock. They set Fire to the Houses with Fury, and popular Tumult; so that whatsoever was not within a Wall and Ditch, perish’d that Day. Those in the Fort attempted to succour their People; but greater Numbers of Ternates coming on, kill’d some of those, who had sally’d out, not only with Darts of solid Canes, which they cast most dexteriously, with Arrows, Cymiters and Shields, which they us’d when Idolaters; but with Muskets and other Fire Arms. The rest of the Portugueses routed, fled to their Fort; for those who had gain’d Reputation by so many brave Exploits, were that Day depriv’d of their Courage, by the Injustice of the Action they had been concern’d in. They sent again to Goa to desire Relief, and to represent the Desolation. Distress, not only of the Fort of Ternate, but of all the others the King of Portugal held in those Eastern Parts; for they had cast off Subjection to him in most of them. They forgot not to mention the persecution of the Religion, and the scarcity of Arms and Provisions, of both which the Ternates had deprived them. These News were flown into India and Spain by other Ways; and all the while the Siege lasted Goa sent Succours to the Moluccos, in their trading Galeons; but Tydore and Ternate mortal Enemies. the vast Distance, the many Shoals, and the violent Storms those Seas are subject to, occasion’d the Loss of those Ships, or put them by their intended Voyage.

The Commanders in those Eastern Ports, who follow’d the Example of those of Ternate were not Idle; for the Portuguese, tho’ the reducing of those Rebels succeeded not at that Time, did not miss of obtaining other Victories, which should we relate them here, would make this look more like a History of all India than of one small part of it; besides that the Portugueses Nation has not wanted Learned Authors, who have transmitted them to us, where they may be seen at large. The Spaniards have also done the like, in a much more loftier Stile than mine. We must therefore circumscribe our selves, and return to the Moluccos, where the Besieged, as it were forsaken, and abandon’d by all the Earth, endure the Hardships and Perils of Places so streightned.

Thus all their Hopes, under Heaven, depended on their own Valour, and the inviolable Friendship of the King of Tydore, so implacable an Enemy to him of Ternate, that neither the Neighbourhood of the Kingdoms, divided only by an Arm of the Sea, a League and half over, in the midst whereof is a small Desart Island, which almost joyns them, nor the ancient and reiterated Alliances, do in the least abate of their Hatred, which seems to be fatal, and consequently unavoidable betwixt those two Kings and Nations.

However, the Ternates being always intent upon War, and thinking no Practice Practices of Babu with Tydore. unlawful, that may secure their Success, they ply’d their Weapons on one Hand, and on the Other, carry’d on their Intrigues, for a Pacification with the King of Tydore; not so much out of any Desire of coming to a Conclusion with him, as to the End that being amaz’d with the Hopes of Peace, he might grow slack in Relieving and Assisting the Besieged. They offer’d to restore him some Places, taken from him during the late Wars; and to give him those and others, as a Portion with a Daughter to the King of Ternate; besides other Advantages, of which Accommodation the King of Bachian was the chief Manager. To these fair Offers, they added Threats; and both the Kings and their Nations agreeing in Religion, and it being easy to cover any Occasion of War under fair Pretences; it happen’d that the Tydores, at least while this Politick Game was playing, did not afford their Succours with the same Zeal as they had done at first; and that [60]King, who till then had been a constant Friend, upon another Consideration, deferr’d Policy of the K. of Tydore. his coming to a Resolution. He waited, as well as the Besieged, the Arrival of the Portuguese Succours, and several of his Carcoas often touch’d at the Islands of Borneo, to enquire what Ships pass’d that Way from India. They examin’d every Vessel they met, and every slight Intelligence puff’d them up, or quite cast them down. In short, both Parties protracted the Time, with so little Regard to any other Principles, that all their Courage and Fidelity, depended on it alone.

This is so certain, that the King of Tydore being just at the Point of accepting the Wife, and Lands offer’d him by the Enemy, fell off upon the News brought him, that a Galleon was seen sailing for the Molucco Islands, and he rejected all the Proposals. It was afterwards known to be bound for the Philippine Islands, and belong’d neither to the Portuguese nor Spaniards; but to Venetian Merchants, who traded between Manila and China, with several Commodities of their own Country, and other Parts of the Levant; so that the King of Tydore, and the Besieged themselves began to make fresh Reparations, like Men that sharpen their Weapons, and fit their Armour.

These Succours encourag’d them to several bold Attempts. The Besieged made Sallies, and the Length of the Siege. a Salley, to nail up the Enemies Cannon, and tho’ few in Number, several Times assaulted their Camp, still returning Victorious, without any considerable Loss. They dismounted all their Cannon from the Walls, their Works nothing availing them, because they were not made according to Art. The Siege lasted five Years, the Portugueses sustaining it with notable Resolution, and the Indians pressing with no less Obstinacy; nor would the Hunger, Thurst, Nakedness, and the Hardships of the Seasons have been tollerable, had not they been common to both Parties. Extream Want, was the Occasion of several signal Exploits of that Valour, wherewith they defended their Lives, and the Fort. This produc’d Rage and Admiration in the Enemy; and an affectionate Compassion in the Women of the Island; among whom they found Advice, Secrecy, Intelligence and known Favour. So great is the Power of Persecuted Virtue, that it prevails, even upon those Enemies, who harbour the Memory of a Wrong, to convert it, first into a Desire of forgetting it, and without long Interposition of Time, produces a Zeal to support that Valour they first hated.

Corcoa Almadia
Corcoa
Almadia

The End of the Second Book.

