---
heading: Book 4
linkTitle: Book 4
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---



These Endeavours us’d by Spain to shut out the Monsters of Heresy, dispell’d the Dread spread abroad by Drake, and his Reasons for Digressions. Example in the North and South Seas.

Since his coming to Ternate, oblig’d us to write all these Particulars, we could not, once they began to have any Place in this Relation, forbear making it perfect by delivering the Success of them. A compleat History is the Witness of Times, the Light of Truth, the Life of Memory, and in fine the Mistress of Life. Therefore, to perform the Duty incumbent on it from such important Employments, it is not to spare any notable Digressions; especially when they deviate but little from the main Subject, and have some Connexion with it.

This here is due to a most prudent Action of King Philip IId. and his Ministers; and shows his Catholick Indignation against Sectaries, and his Zeal for preserving the Faithful of his Indies untainted, and improving the Disposition in the Souls of Idolaters, towards drawing them to the Faith.

It demonstrates how he compass’d the whole World by Means of his Commanders, that he might introduce the said Faith in all Corners thereof; to the Reputation of his Watchfulness in the Service of this Mistical Empire, which is now Militant, in order to its being Triumphant. For this Reason it is absolutely Necessary, not to conceal Sarmiento’s Resolution, nor to leave him in those remote Seas, till we have brought him back to Spain, and then we will return to the Molucco Islands, which were in the mean while busy about their own Destruction. [85]

Sarmiento did not go up to the great City he discover’d at a Distance, because he would not depart from his Ship, to which he return’d, leaving us still desirous to be throughly satisfi’d of so strange a Thing. By the Way he found two extraordinary long Cloaks, or Barbarian Blankets, made of Sheep-Skins, with the Wooll on, and a pair of Shoes made of raw Hides to bind about the Feet, which the Indians could not carry off, thro’ the fearful Precipitation of their Flight. They continu’d their Discovery, South Coast. and the Wind oblig’d them to strike over to the Southern Coast, five Leagues distant from Our Lady of the Vale; and tho’ the cold Winds blew, they found this Country more Temperate than the others. It is inhabited by proper People, has wild and tame Cattel, and Game, as was declar’d by Philip, so they call’d an Indian they brought over, in Honour to King Philip. It produces Cotton, a certain Sign of its being Temperate; and Cinnamon, by them call’d Cabea. The Air is very serene, and the Stars appear bright, so that they are plainly to be observ’d, lay’d down, and describ’d. Sarmiento says it is useful in those Parts to observe the Crozier, which is 30 Degrees above the Antartick Pole, and that he made use of it, for taking of Latitudes, as we do in our Hemisphere of the North Star, Observations for Sailors. tho’ with another Sort of Computation. And in Regard that the Crozier does not serve all the Year, he sought out another Polar Star, nearer to the Pole, of a shorter Computation, but general and perpetual; and he us’d such Industry, that he discover’d, and ascertain’d it by Observations, and Experiments of several clear Nights. He settled the Stars in the Crozier, and two other Croziers, and two other Polar Stars, which take a very small Compass; this he did for the common Benefit of curious Sailors. Notwithstanding all these Tokens, and the Incouragement of humane Curiosity, no Man has ever gone to those Towns, which had such promising Signs of Civility; tho’ those rude Giants did not seem to confirm those Appearances of a well-settled Country. Sarmiento ran along the Streight, Sarmiento comes into the North Sea. never ceasing to sound, and lay it down till he came to a Cape, he call’d, Of the Holy Ghost, from which to that of the Virgin Mary, there are 110 Leagues from the South to the North Sea. Here they began to order their Course with due Difference. They saw Whales, and on the Shores, Thickets of several unknown Plants. They ran thro’ Storms and Dangers, surprizing even to such experienced Sailors as they were. They all vow’d Offerings to Churches, Alms, and Pilgrimages to Places of Devotion in Spain, with other solemn Engagements, on which fearful Mortals in Danger, devoutly ground and encourage their Hopes. The Tempest ceas’d, and on the 25th of March, about Midnight, Sarmiento saw a low white Rainbow, opposite to the Moon, which was moving against it; and it was occasion’d by Repercussion of her Rays, which fell by Refraction on the opposite Clouds. He says, That neither he nor any other Person, ever saw, heard, or read of the like; but by his good Leave, in Albericus Vespusius’s Epitome of Voyages, we read that the same happen’d in the Year 1501, in that same Place, where both of them taking the Sun’s Altitude, they found him in 23 Degrees large, which is as good as 15 Leagues. This Day they were within the Tropick of Capricorn. Proceeding forward, they lost their Reckoning, and the Hopes of recovering it, for Want of Mathematical Instruments; but on the first of April, [86]1580, at Night, they discover’d, and observ’d the Polar-Star of the Triangle in 21 Degrees; and on the 10th of the same Month, they saw the Anchors at the Island Ascention. Island of the Ascention, at eight Leagues Distance. They anchor’d there, found Water, and saw several Crosses, erected by some Portugueses, who in their Way to India, were cast away there by a Storm, and the Living, out of Devotion, set them up on the Graves of those that dy’d. On one of them they found a Board nail’d, with this Inscription, Don John de Castel Rodrigro, Commodore, arriv’d here with five India Ships, on the 13th of May, 1576. Near to it, Sarmiento set up another, as a Memorial, that the first Ship coming from Peru, touch’d there, having pass’d thro’ the Streight from the South to the North-Sea, on the King’s Account, with the Occasion of his Voyage. This Island abounds in Sharks, which are Ravenous Birds. Sea-Monsters, Fish, and a Sort of such greedy and troublesome Fowl, that they make at whatsoever they see. They took the Ensigns Hat off his Head, to snatch away a Letter he had stuck in it. He sav’d his Hat, by clapping up his Hand immediately, but lost the Letter, which they pull’d away by force; and afterwards they saw a Fray in the Air, the others endeavouring to take it from that Harpy, which first snatch’d it away. This Island lies in 7 Degrees and a half of South Latitude, and it is very observeable, that tho’ the Spaniards were very attentive to their Compass, and took so many Precautions for their Security, yet such was the Force of the several Currents, that when they thought they were 60 Leagues from Pernambuco East and West, at the River of Virtues, on the Coast of Brazil, they found themselves 400 Leagues to the Eastward; so that the Currents deceiv’d, and drove them 340 Leagues from the Point they had settled by the Degree of Latitude. Sarmiento discourses largely upon this Effect, charging the Sea-Charts with Falshood, and being ignorantly laid down. Dreadful Tempests ensu’d, till on the 28th of April, on the Coast of Guinea he discover’d Sierra Liona, abounding in Gold, and Blacks. Then the Islands they call of Idols, and beyond them those of Vixagaos, inhabited by stout Black Archers, who shoot poison’d Arrows, wherewith, such as are wounded, presently dye raving. On the 8th of May they all fell sick on the Coast of Guinea, of Fevers, Lameness, Swellings, and Imposthumations in their Gums, which in that Country prove Mortal, by Reason of the Excessive Heat, and then for Want of Water; but Heaven reliev’d them with seasonable Rain. When they labour’d to make the Islands of Cabo Verde for some Refreshment, the Winds drove them off. They bore up without finding Land, or any Ship, till on the 22d of May, being in 15 Degrees 40 Minutes of North Latitude, they descry’d two Sail. Sarmiento believ’d they had been Portugueses, and was desirous to make up to hale them; but upon better Observation perceiv’d, the one was a Tall Ship, the other a Sloop, both of them French, who pursu’d and endeavour’d to get to Windward of him. The Sloop came foremost to view our Ship, which made good its Advantage. When they Fight with the French. were come in Sight of the Island of Santiago, the French held up a Naked Sword, and then fir’d some Shot. The Spaniards answer’d with their Muskets, which was then done by both Sides, and several French Men fell, tho’ on our Side never a Man was kill’d, but some wounded, and then they fled more swiftly than they had pursu’d. Those on the Island beheld [87]the Ingagement, and thinking it had been Counterfeit, and both the Ships French, they stirr’d not out to Succour either. When the Pirate was quite fled, a Caravel of Algarve arriv’d coming from Portugal, which discover’d the Pirate’s Name, and Strength; declaring he had 85 Men in the Ship, and 25 in the Sloop, and among them a Portuguese Pilot. That he had plunder’d four other Ships, and the said Caravel, at Cape Blanco, on the Coast of Africk; and at the Island of May, not far from Santiago, had sunk another Caravel, belonging to the Royal Navy, which was sailing for Brazil, in order to People Paraguay; where the English had of late Years built Towns, intermarrying with, and being attracted by the Love, and Children they had by the Tapuyer Indian Women.

Sarmiento at Cabo Verde. Sarmiento Landed at Cabo Verde, the Custom-House of which City yearly is worth to the King 100000 Ducats. There are always in it 20000 Blacks, because of the settled Trade for them. Before he Anchor’d, there came Boats from the Shore, to view his Ship, and he telling them, he came from Peru, through the Streights of Magellan, they were amaz’d. They return’d to give an Account to their Governor Gaspar de Andrade, and told him, That those that came in the Ship, were Men of several Shapes, Deform’d, and Ill-look’d, and others with long tangled Hair and Locks. These were some Indians of Peru and Chile. As for the Rest Sarmiento has these Words, As to our being Ill-look’d, they did not wrong us; for besides that we had no effeminate Countenances, the Powder and Sweat of our Volleys of small Shot, a little before, had not set us off to any Advantage; and, in short, we had more mind to some Water than to look like Beaus. However, neither he nor his Men went Ashore, till they had satisfy’d a Pratick Master that none of them were infected with the Plague. The next Day they Landed bare-Foot, in Procession, with Crosses, and Images, repairing to the Church of our Lady of the Rosary, where they gave Thanks, Alms, and other effects of their Vows, with extraordinary Joy; for every Storm is so much Honour, when recounted in safe Harbour. They Confess’d, and receiv’d the Blessed Sacrament at a Mass they had Vow’d to cause to be said. The Governor, Don Bartholomew Leytao, Entertain’d, and made much of them, tho’ at first he would not believe they had pass’d the Streight. The Sick were Cured, and the Ship and Boat which were much shatter’d, re-fitted. The main Design of this Voyage, which was to Fight Drake, and provide the proper Defence against the Designs of the Enemy, had not been compass’d; and therefore Sarmiento, having Fought the French Ship, and Sloop, which appear’d again, alarming that Coast, and both of them flying back with all speed, after being Shatter’d and Beaten, to the Island Mayo, or of May, the common Shelter of Robbers; He redoubled his Watchfulness, and went on to get Intelligence of the English, as well those that pass’d the Streight with Drake, as of those new Planters in Brazil, or Paraguay; as also of the Inclination of the Subjects of the Crown of Portugal, to submit to King Philip, or Don Antony. A Pilot of Algarve inform’d him, That the Intelligence he receives. Year before, betwixt Ayamonte and Tavira, two English Merchants, speaking of the Indies, assured him, that Drake was gone thro’ into the South Sea; and by the Time, the News agreed with what the Indians of the Streight had signify’d to him by Signs; and that he arriv’d safe in England, with two Ships fraught with Gold and Silver of that notable Robbery, [88]which he presented to the Queen. She fitted out five other Ships, with three Years Provision, to return to the Streights of Magellan, to seek out those that had been lost there; and Drake eight more. That the first five were already gone in Decemb. last. That the Merchants had entrusted him with that Secret, taking him for a Portuguese, and who, as such, would not discover it to the Spaniards. By the French he was informed, That as soon as they had brought off some Ships with Blacks from Castro Vedre, they would go over to the Island Margarita, and thence to the North-ward, from the Island of Santo Domingo to Yaguana, whence they came not above four Months since, Loaded with Hides, and Sugar. That they had kill’d Captain Barbudo, in the Island Margarita, in Revenge for the English he had slain. That having taken the Governor of Brazil, they again set him at Liberty. That all their Pilots are Portugueses. He was also told by others who came from thence, and by Captains of Reputation, who were English in Paraguay. returning thither, that in the Bay of Paraguay, near Rio de Janeyro, which is in 21 Degrees, 12 Minutes South Latitude, there had been for eight Years last past, Colonies of English among the Tapujers; with whom for the three last Years, the Portuguese were at War, and had kill’d most of them.

That it is suppos’d the Natives, who are Man-Eaters, had devour’d most of those that fled up the Country. He pick’d up other Intelligence from England, concerning their Navies, their Colonies in those Parts, and Design of Usurping the Molucco Islands with all their Strength, and to render themselves Invincible Masters of the Spice. They dispatch’d a Boat, with these Advices to the Viceroy of Peru; for Sarmiento could not return himself by the way of Brazil and Paraguay, because the force of the Currents had drove him away into the Main Sea, East-ward. Before his Departure, Sarmiento Strangles his Ensign, and Punishes others. he caus’d his Ensign to be Strangled, as a Traytor to his King, to the Dishonour of his Post, and an Obstructor of the Discovery. Two other Soldiers he Bannish’d, one of them from the Indies, and shew’d Severity to some of the Company, on Account of the same Crime, which, it was believ’d, had not been so fully prov’d upon them, as is requisite for inflicting the usual Punishment.

From this Port he sail’d to the Westward, till he came to the Channel between the Island Fuego and that of Santiago, where one of the Ships that came out with him stay’d. Steering Norwest, one Point over or under, Advice-Boat sent the Viceroy of Peru. for that is the Course to the Island S. Anton, he thence dispatch’d the Advice Boat for the Viceroy of Peru, with eight Men, commanded by Ferdinand Alonso. In thirteen Days more he pass’d betwixt the Island Graciosa, one of the Azores, small, but fruitful, and populous, and that of S. George, in which he saw prodigious high Fires. Those he afterwards found verified Conflagration in the Island of S. George. by the Bishop, at Angra, where he resides. That on the first of June that same Year, there were dreadful Earthquakes in the Island of S. George, Voices of Devils were heard, and among other wonderful Effects, the Earth open’d in three Places, whence Streams of Fire ran as far as the Sea. Those continu’d, and seven more broke out, casting forth as many Rivulets of Liquid Fire; one of which ran round an Hermitage, and nine Men running to save some Bee-Hives from being burnt, another Mouth open’d, which swallow’d seven of them, and sing’d the other two. So much Ashes fell like Rain upon the Earth, that it was cover’d a Span deep, and in short, all [89]the Island was on Fire. Sarmiento held on his Course, and on the 18th of June, arriv’d at the City Angra, on the Island Tercera, the Chief of the Azores, where also came in a Ship from the Town of Bernambuco, and another from Baya de todos os Santos, in Brazil. These being ask’d, What they knew of the English, assur’d him, That in November last past there came five White Men, with fifteen Indians, who were going to Isleos, and the Portuguese Towns by Land; and going along the Shore, they on a sudden, at Rio de las Cuentas, lighted upon an English Sloop. Seven of the Some English in Brazil. Men were ashore drying their Sails, and as soon as they saw the Travellers they fled. The Portuguese persisted pursuing them; but the English letting fly some Arrows, held on their Flight, two of them up the Mountain, and the other five along the Coast, till they got into the Sloop. They cut their Cables, and left behind them two large Carriages for Guns.

The Travelers desir’d them to come ashore, and offer’d them Meat, and all other Necessaries, assuring them they meant no Harm. They answer’d, they would not come, and show’d Muskets, Cross-bows and Pikes, pointing a small Gun, to fire at them. It was then Ebb, and they departed six Leagues from thence, to sail near the River de las Cuentas. That at the Island Cape, over-against Camamu, another Portuguese Ship, that knew nothing of this Sloop, lighted on it, when there were only three English Men left in her, the rest being kill’d ashore, with Arrows by the Natives. In short, the Sloop was cast away, five Men of it being taken, who declar’d, that it came with a Squadron of ten Ships, in which a certain great Englishman An English Squadron. pass’d the Streights of Magellan. That they return’d thence Coasting along, to plant a Colony in the most convenient Place for their Purpose, the Admiral having 500 Men aboard for that End. Four Hundred of them were Soldiers, the rest Seamen, and other Mechanicks. That all this Squadron Anchor’d in an Island of Cainbals, or Man-Eaters, and a Storm rising, nine of them sail’d away, but the Admiral not being able to get from her Anchors time enough, was Cast away, none being sav’d but those that came The Admiral cast-away. in the Sloop, and they escap’d by being then gone to Water. One of these five was 35 Years of Age, and an able Mathematitian. He affirm’d, That those who escap’d the Storm, would soon return to the Coast of Brazil, with a numerous Fleet. Among other Particulars, he told them, that they found an Inscription with the King of Spain’s Arms, in that part of the Island Cananca, where they were, which their Commander in chief took away, and set up in the Place of it another, with those of England. Besides all this, three of those Ships that escap’d the Storm, coming before the Portuguese Town of Rio de Janeiro, to make the Cape, and find out the other six, the Governor of that Place, sent out four Canoes to take Cognisance of them, which on a sudden fell in with another Long-Boat belonging to the English, who, as soon as they spy’d the Canoes, made away, but could not do it so fast as to save all. They took Three, and the Governor sent them to Bahia; but the Ships made away with all their Sails. The Prisoners own’d, That in case they met with their Ships at the Cape, they English at Brazil. were resolv’d to go to Parayba, or Pernambuco. In other Respects they agreed with the Account given by those in the Sloop. The English arriv’d at Brazil about November, 1579, at the same Time that Sarmiento was seeking [90]for the Streight; and this agrees with the confuse Signs the Brutish Indians of those Parts made to him, as he Touch’d on their Coasts. His chief Care being to enquire into these Matters, he was inform’d by the Ship of theirs cast-away. Corregidor, that is the Governor in Civil Affairs of Angra, that on the second of November, that same Year, another English Ship was Cast-away at Gualva, a Town two Leagues distant from that City, with six Men in it, two whereof, and a Black were sav’d. It appear’d there had been 300 Men in the Ship, and much Wealth, which was thrown into the Sea, during the Storm. That they were going to plant Colonies in India, and most of the Men dy’d on the Coast of Guinea; and perhaps this might be one of the nine Ships aforesaid. The People of Gualva drew out of the Sea fifteen heavy pieces of cast Iron Cannon, but could not get out several others. The fifteen are of an extraordinary Magnitude, as it were for some settled Fort. To conclude, he was inform’d, and Time has since verified it, that they were preparing in those Northern Parts to rob us of the Treasure of Metals, and Spice there is in those Countries, and in exchange to Introduce their Sects. The final Success of both the Spanish and the English Admirals, was that they arriv’d safe in their respective Countries, forsaken Drake’s Treasure seiz’d. by the Vice-Admirals. Drake return’d to London, with an immense Treasure, which the Queen seiz’d, alledging, That Don Barnardino de Menoza, then the Spanish Embassador at that Court, demanded Restitution, as belonging to his K. and the rest of it taken from his Subjects; but she adjudg’d it to her own Cofers, in Recompence for the Dammage sustain’d, when the Spaniards supported her Rebels in Ireland. Drake was not enrich’d by his Robberies, nor did he gain any Reputation by his Actions; but on the contrary he was slighted in England, either because they knew what he did was not Honourable, or that generally a Man’s own Country is Sarmiento in Spain. ungrateful to him. Sarmiento departing from Angra with a fair Wind, discover’d the Coast of Spain on the 7th of August, and arriv’d at Cape S. Vincent, full of Intelligence and News from so great a Part of the World, and of the Designs of several Nations, and the Crown of Portugal. His Arrival, and Account produc’d the fitting out of other Fleets, and fresh Preparations in Spain, and in the Indies, which extended to the Relief of the remotest Parts. One of them was the Reducing of Ternate, and the sending over one hundred Spanish Families, arm’d, provided and examin’d, as to Quality and Virtue, to be the first Inhabitant of those Desarts upon the Streight. They carry’d Tools, Arms, Instructions, and all Necessaries to fortifie the narrow Parts of it. Sarmiento went as Chief, and Governour of those Dominions. This Project prov’d unsuccessful, and in the general Opinion of all Men, it was through the Fault of the Genéral Sancho Flores. Afterwards Sarmiento was taken, and set at Liberty in England where he had Conferences with the Queen and Drake upon this Subject, whence he drew Information for the Execution of greater Designs.

King Henry of Portugal dyes. This Year King Henry Dy’d in Portugal, when he had Reign’d but thirteen Months. Five Governours had the Administration during the Interregnum, and were disturb’d by the Arming of Don Antonio, within the Kingdom, and by King Philip’s Forces already advancing into the Frontiers. So that neither Government could do any more than consult about the present Exigencies; which at that Time were neither perfect Peace nor open War, there being Hopes that they would lay down their Arms, and joyn [91]with their true Prince, whom the Portuguese is wont to Love, as a Father, rather than as a King. However there were some Troubles, and Commotions. Private Discord is an inseparable incident to all Governments, and that draws the Thoughts of Men after it, and is often the Original of general Calamities, tho’ it be moderated, or justify’d by a sincere Zeal.

King Philip enter’d Lisbon supporting his Right by his Power, and King Philip the II. at Lisbon. whilst the other Provinces, which compose that Monarchy in Spain, Africk, Asia, and the East-Indies submitted to him, he bestow’d Favours, gave Laws, confirm’d the Old, ratified Priviledges, and gain’d Affections by his Presence, and a General Pardon, which he extended to those who had offended him. On the 15th of November 1582, he swore to observe those Laws establish’d by his Predecessors, and particularly by King Emanuel, as then next Heir to the Crowns of Spain, for himself and his Son, Prince Michael, whom God took to a better Kingdom in his Infancy. Those Laws were afterwards sworn to by King Sebastian, and all of them imported, that all Honours, Employments, Benefices, and the Management of the Revenue of the Crown, with all other Commands by Sea and Land, in Portugal, Africk, India, the Islands and all other Parts already conquered, or to be conquer’d by that Crown, shall be in the Hands of Natural born Portugueses. And by the 24th Chapter of these Laws, it was establish’d, that in fitting out Fleets He Swears to maintain the Laws. for India, or otherwise for Defence of the Kingdom, or suppressing of Pyrates, the King should take the necessary Measures with the Kingdom of Portugal, though he should use the Assistance of his Majesties other Dominions. They were sensible that this favourable Law, without infringing the Antient Laws, made way for employing the Forces of the Crown of Castile, in the Recovery, or Preservation of the Kingdoms of the Eastern Archipelago, where at that Time the Christians suffer’d Martyrdom, without any Opposition. And the King for the Recovery of Ternate, especially consider’d the Conveniency of the Philippine Islands, which lie more opportune than India; the Justness of which Reflection has been confirm’d by the Event.

India at this Time was govern’d by the Viceroy Fernan Tellez, to whom King Philip the second Writ, representing how favourable an Opportunity he had to do God good Service, to secure the Tranquility of Christendom, and settle Peace, which inestimable Advantages would be owing to his Fidelity and Care, if through them those Provinces should be united to the Monarchy, without any Trouble, by continuing Loyal, and providing that the Tributary Kings should do the same. He put him in Mind that Services India submits to him. become the more valuable by the surmounting of the greatest Difficulties, and gave him good Hopes of a Reward, which would have been fulfill’d, had he come home to see the Effects of them and his Services. But Fernan Tellez had no need of any such Promises, or of the Perswasions which are as good as Commands, contain’d in Letters from Ministers of State, and sent with the King’s Letter. These being sent over Land, came Tellez the Viceroy Loyal. to his Hands in six Months, and he either preserving, or gaining their Affections had so much Forecast as to confirm the King, Princes, and Sangiacks, who, in those remote Parts, pay subjection to the Crown of Portugal; before he knew any thing of the Orders sent him, or of the additional Estate the King was pleas’d to confer on him. By his Authority he [92]disappointed some Projects of Confederacies, set a foot for the recovering of their Former Liberty, hoping by the Example of the King of Ternate, that the Revolutions in Europe might turn to their Advantage. But in despight of these Contradictions and Changes, Fernan Tellez so far prevailed, as that the Religious Mendicants, and the Jesuits, continu’d the preaching of the Gospel, with such Fervour, that they defy’d even Tyranny it self. The Conversions of Idolater Princes are truly and elegantly related in the Writings and Books of the Missions of the Society, and other Ecclesiastical Histories; so that they excite, and inflame Devotion in the Breasts of such as read them. There may be seen, how the Truth was embrac’d, with all possible Affection; how hastily, and eagerly they learn’d the Catechism; what Rejoycings the Catechumens made on the Day they were baptiz’d; Queens, and Princesses worshipping the Images of Saints; and sweeping the new Churches, and Chappels with their own Hands; with what Attention, and Exactness they honour’d the Ceremonies of the Church, and lastly, how they frequented the Sacraments, and improv’d in Christianity.

All this was Persecuted, and Extirpated by the King of Ternate; who was now so far from enduring any neighbouring Empire, that he struck a Dread into the remotest; insomuch, that tho’ they were all sensible they King of Bachian kill’d. ought in all good Policy to support the Kingdoms of Tydore and Bachian, yet they became lookers on, as it were on a Stage, to behold the Assaults given, and the Cruelties acted at the Sieges. And in the latter of them, whilst throughout India the Standards were display’d in submission to Spain, the King of Ternate enter’d Bachian, and press’d on so vigorously, that he took the Forts by main Force, and made the principal Sangiacks Prisoners. At the Taking of the City of Bachian, the King of the Island was slain in Fight, with all the Portugueses that assisted him; and the Prince, his Son, taken, who was then a Christian, but soon after, having taken an Oath of Fealty to the Conquerer, and Apostatiz’d from the True Religion, he was miserably Restor’d to his Kingdom, exchanging the Hopes of his Souls Salvation, for the Pernicious Fables of the Alcoran, to which he has adhear’d till this time; tho’ in Temporals he now owns the sovereign Dominion of our King. The War with the Tydores lasted longer, the two Navies fighting with indifferent Success, and Victory changing sides, according Molucco way of Fighting. to various Accidents. These Princes method of making War depends on Ambushes, and Stratagems, where Subtilty supplies the place of Strength. It is rare that either side is much weakned; because as soon as sensible of the others Advantage, the Weaker flyes, and reserves himself for better Fortune; nor do they look upon it as Dishonourable to fly, for in those Parts they have but rude Notions of the Laws of Honour. The last Action, after they had sustain’d the Siege with extraordinary Magnanimity, was a Sally made by the Portuguese and Tydores from the Fort, with much Order and Conduct, Attacking the Enemies Camp with such Bravery, that Battle of Tydores and Ternates. tho’ they were much superior in number, they could not stand the Fury of the King of Tydore. The Ternates being put to Flight, imbark’d after a great Slaughter of their Men, and never stopp’d till they came to Talangame, so they call the Harbour of Ternate on that side. The Tydores pursu’d, and being flush’d with Victory despis’d the Succours the Ternates had [93]ready in that Place, which Addition made them renew the Fight with fresh Vigour, and wrest the Victory which then inclin’d to the Tydores. These without breaking their Order, retir’d and imbark’d; and hasting back in their Carcoas came to Tydore, where they fortify’d themselves against what might happen. The King of Ternate return’d to this City in Triumphant Manner, making a Show of some Prisoners.

The News of the Union of Portugal to Castile, was now known throughout all those Eastern Parts, and so well receiv’d, that instead of offering at any Opposition, they all joyfully submitted, hoping they should be protected by a more powerful Arm, than they had been before. Nor were they deceiv’d in their Expectation, for, pursuant to what the King had sworn at Lisbon, concerning the Fleets, for suppressing of Pyrates, and Garrisoning the Coasts of Africk, he granted his Royal Order, for all the Governours of the Philippine Islands to take Care to relieve the Moluccos, and all other the Dominions in India, belonging to the Crown of Portugal, making use of New Spain, and all other Kingdoms subject to the Crown of Castile, there being more conveniency for supplying them from thence, than even from India.

The King of Ternate, being sensible of the Change of Times, and how much greater Forces threatned him than before; and that he should not be suffer’d to reign, without submitting to a Superior, he grew better advis’d, Nayque Embassador for Spain. and sent an Ambassador to Lisbon. The Ambassador was Cachil Nayque, well known for the Antiquity of his Family, and brave Actions. Nayque signifies a Tribune, or Commander. He embark’d with much Wealth of those Parts, as Porcelane, Chinese Silks, Calico’s and Muslins, Spice, Fruit, Aromatick Woods and Barks, and Preserves of the same; and passing between the Islands of Pangicaz and Manado, near to that of Celebes, keeping off from the Equinoctical, coasted it and cross’d the Line His Voyage. again, till he came to Borneo. There he visited the King, who was at Tayaopura, and deliver’d him Letters from his Master, attempting by Word of Mouth, to unite him to the Molucco Nation against the Crown of Spain. Contenting himself with the first Hopes, he pass’d on betwixt Cremato and Surato, and cross’d the Islands Pulo and Linga, in sight of the greater Java, thence thro’ the Streight of Malaca, by the great Ones of Banca and Bintam, in the Port whereof were then the 20 Ships, which are sent from Sumatra every Year, loaded with Pepper. He barter’d away much of what he had in his own Ship, and propos’d a general Revolt to all Streights of Sincapura and Sabao. Nations. There are two Streights there; the one of Sincapura, so call’d from that City built on the Coast of Malaca; and the other of Sabao, from an Island of that Name, and this leads to Sumatra. Nayque steer’d this Course, and soon put into the Harbour which lies going out of the Channel.

This great Island, opposite to Malaca, and divided from it by a Bay full Sumatra describ’d. of Ridges, of Rocks and Shoals, and above a thousand smaller Islands, was formerly a Peninsula, and contiguous to Malaca, as Sicily is said to have been to Italy, Ancient Geographers call’d it Trapobana, the Modern Sumatra. The Ancients also call’d it, the Golden Chersonesus, and the most curious Searchers into Antiquity, Ophir, whence Solomon gather’d that vast Mass of Treasure. According to the Portugueses it is 80 [94]Leagues in Length, and 30 in Breadth. (Here seems to be some Mistake in the Author, for the Island is well known to be above 80 Leagues in Length.) Italian Writers say it is 2100 in Circumference. The Dutch, who have traded and made War there, do not contradict it, and all agree it is the largest in all the East, and the most fruitful we know of. It lies thwarting from North to South, in the Torrid Zone, and the Equinoctial Line cuts it in the Middle; so that one Part falls to the Northern Hemisphere, and takes up five Degrees, and the other to the Southern, extending seven Degrees. This Island is, according to some, divided into four Kingdoms; others say ten, and some 29; but we know of eight, which are, Pedir, Pacem, Achem, Camper, Menancabo, wealthy in Gold Mines, and Zaude; and up the Inland the other two of Andragide, and Auru, the Natives whereof are Idolaters and Man-Eaters. They devour, not only Strangers, but their own Brothers, and Fathers. In short, among these barbarous People, Hunger produces the same Effects as Passion. The King of Achem is the most Powerful of them, and they all pay Homage to the Nayque stirs up Princes to revolt. Crown of Portugal. Nayque enter’d the Court of Achem, attended by his own Men, and follow’d by the Multitude of Chinese, Japonese, Malay, Persian, and Turkish Merchants; all of them flattering themselves with the Expectation of new Commotions. He first worshipp’d the King in a Temple, where there were monstrous Idols, notwithstanding that the People are Mahometans. He had afterwards private Conferences with him at Court, and in a few Days brought him over to his Party, with his Wealth, as if he had been a poor Man. After delivering his Master’s Letters, he told him, that before he went over into Europe, whether he was sent to discover the Power of Spain in its Origin, or Source, at a Time when it was distracted by such Revolutions, it was convenient that most wealthy Part of Asia should be restor’d to its former Condition, a Matter of no Difficulty, if they were firmly united among themselves. That none were so able to overthrow the Neighbouring Monarchy, which from Malaca had, as it were, fetter’d so many Provinces, as the Kings of Sumatra, if they, considering of what Moment it was to them, would stand by one another. That since he had successfully besieg’d that hateful City, assaulted its Walls, and Forts, and valu’d himself on being an Enemy to the Portugueses, he ought not to let slip so favourable an Opportunity, which offer’d him compleat Victory. That he should remember the several Expeditions of the Viceroys against Sumatra, and that they always breed up Adelantados, or Lords-Lieutenants, with their Soldiers in Pay against those Kingdoms. And that since, till then they had not been able to make him uneasy, it was too much Forbearance to suffer a perpetual The King of Achem complies. Threat of Thraldom to subsist so near him. The King of Achem, listen’d to him with Satisfaction, as one, who, with all his Nation, hates the Haughtiness of the Portuguese Behaviour; yet he neither promis’d, nor perform’d any more than obstructing the Trade of Malaca, till he had reduc’d it to Want. Nor did he keep the Secret, for they had soon an Account at Malaca and Goa of these Contrivances. He farther promis’d; That whensoever the King of Ternate should make a greater Invasion, or go about to extend, or enlarge himself, as far as he pretended he had a right, he would continue to give the Diversion, as far as stood with his [95]Conveniency, and that he should have the Liberty of his Ports, and all Supplies for his Ships in his Kingdom. Nayque return’d Thanks, and extended his Negociation, endeavouring to bring in the other Tyrants of Sumatra, as for the Publick Good. Then sailing away through the Streight of Sunda, so call’d from the Name of a City in the furthest Part of the Province, beyond the Line; he proceeded to the greater Java, no less Fertile than the other in the same Medicinal, and Odoriferous Growth, at the Time when Thomas Candish, an English Commander was arriv’d there, coming from the North-Sea, by the Way of New Spain.

Nayque went up the Country to visit, and found him in a populous City, where he was loading Pepper, which is excellent in Java, with that King’s Leave, he being a Friend to the English, who had already settled a Factory. Candish in Java presented by Nayque. He found him on the Banks of a River of such a Nature, that it presently converts any Wood whatsoever cast into it into Stone, as solid and hard as our Pebbles. He bore the Englishman Company to the Port of Sunda Calapa, viewed his Ship, and made as much of him as he could. Among other Things he presented him a Pavillion, artificially wove all with sweet scented Cloves, and not black, which was not only fit to keep out the excessive Cold of England, but even to dry up over moist Bodies that slept under it. There is daily Experience of its atractive Virtue at Ternate, by placing great Vessels full of Water in the middle of the Rooms where the Cloves Clove atracts Water, as does China Silk. are kept, and in the Morning they find the Heaps of Cloves damp, and the Vessels empty and dry. The same Essential Heat is in the Skeins of China Silk, which therefore those who deal in it keep at a small Distance from the Water, yet they suck it, without touching, and by this Fraud they weigh the heavier. Captain John Lopez de Ribera carry’d such a Pavillion of Cloves, as is above mention’d, and presented it to the Earl of Coruna, who was then Viceroy. Nayque, like a Flash of Lightning which burns all that stands in its way, endeavour’d to stir up those who before were kept peaceable by the Valour of Fernan Tellez, and to encourage the Turbulent, but without staying to see the effect of his Negociation, he made directly towards the Cape of Good-Hope, yet it is more likely, and even positive, that he went first to Malaca, and thence in the India Ships to Spain.

Whilst Nayque was at Sea, the Marques de Santa Cruz had in the Ocean fought the Fleet Commanded by Philip Strozzi, in which was Antony the Bastard, Pretender to the Crown of Portugal, and destroy’d it, Antony the Bastard Defeated. Chastizing the French, who with real, or counterfeit Commissions from their King, had oppos’d King Philip’s just Possession. He arrived victorious at the Island of S. Michael, cut off the Heads of the French Gentlemen, and condemn’d the Rest to the Galleys. Strozzi dy’d of his Wounds, and Don Antonio escap’d in a Boat, and return’d to Zealand, to solicite fresh Succours in England and France. In the mean while, the King of Achem perform’d his Promise. His Kingdom lies next the first Promontory of the Kingdom of Achem. Island, in four Degrees and a half of North Latitude, and consequently his Ships easily made themselves Masters of all the Streight between Sumatra and Achem, which they so entirely possess’d, that they suffer’d none of the Ships to pass to Malaca, which brought Merchandize and Provisions from China, Japan, Camboxa, nor even from the Moluccos, obliging them to [96]Coast about several Islands, to the great Loss of the Merchants. But the Portuguese Dealers in the City of Pedir, eight Leagues from Achem, sustain’d much greater Dammage. Most of them fled to Malaca, and tho’ Fernan Tellez was then upon his Departure, he gave the necessary Orders at Goa for their Relief. He sunk some of the Enemies Ships, and took one loaded with Daggers, they call Crizes, made at Menancabo, and a numerous Artillery, a Thing well known, and cast in Sumatra, many Years before the Europeans brought them into those Parts. This appears by the Victory the Portugueses obtain’d over that Nation, during the Blockade of Malaca.

The King of Achem sending a Daughter to be Married to the King of Zor, not far from Malaca, in the Country of Siam, among other rich Gifts, Monstrous Piece of Cannon. by way of Portion, presented him a Brass Cannon of such a bigness, that the like had never been seen in Europe. This prodigious Gun, and the Princess that was to be Queen of Zor, fell into the Hands of the Portugueses. The taking of this Prize, and some others, clear’d the Sea of that Fleet; and that extraordinary piece of Cannon, which serv’d to Ballast a Ship, was brought as a Present to the King of Spain, for its Monstrous Size, but a Storm oblig’d them to leave it in the Island Tercera, where it is now seen and admir’d. The City Zor was also Taken by the Portugueses, and in it they found 1500 pieces of Cannon, Artificially Cast, with curious Figures and Flowers of Rais’d-Work on them. The Molucco Embassador Molucco Embassador at Lisbon. being come to Lisbon, obtain’d Audience of the King; who, tho’ he was fully inform’d of the Embassadors Falshood, and the Practices of his Nation, yet gave him a favourable Hearing, after he had shew’d his Credentials to the Ministers of State. He in a long Speech recounted, from its Original, the constant Fidelity or the Molucco Kings, and how particularly Remarkable it had been in Sultan Aerio, and that the wicked Commander His Speech. in Chief in putting him to Death, had equally wrong’d the Crown of Portugal. That since the Murderer was not punish’d, to satisfy the dead Man’s Children and Kingdoms, it might well be concluded, that so Cruel and Undeserv’d an Execution had been by the Direction of some higher Power than the Governor Mesquita, and that even in case the Crime had been Notorious it had been more Prudence to charge it upon some private Person. That King Cachil Babu intreated his Majesty to punish the Offender in such manner as might give Satisfaction, and be an Example and Security to all the Asiatick Kings, that own the Dominion of Spain. In Return for that Favour, and Justice, he promised to Restore the Fort of Ternate, and his other Kingdoms, which were Alienated, and that they would return to their former Subjection, as they had promis’d to the Governor Pereyra de la Cerda; so remarkably correct their Behaviour, that there should be visible Effects of a Royal, and Humble Gratitude, both in respect to his Majesties service, and the security of the Garrisons, and to the Advantage of the neighbouring Provinces, belonging to other Kings, who were his Subjects, about Malaca, the Philippine Islands, and Parts Adjacent. He also ingaged to Restore the Churches, and Christian Religion, and much more than had been agreed upon with Pereyra. The King having heard his Request, as if he were ignorant that the Ternates did not deserve the satisfaction they requir’d, since they had taken it themselves so fully, that it [97]exceeded even the bounds and examples of Revenge, he Answer’d, That The King’s Answer. all the Accessaries to that Fact should be found out, it being prov’d that the Principal was already Dead, and none of them should escape Unpunish’d, as would have been done by King Sebastian, had he Liv’d. That Cachil Babu must prepare to Restore all Things into the same Posture they were in before, if he intended to partake of the general Amnesty, which blotted out all past Offences throughout the Dominions of that Crown. Nayque had some private Audiences, and some Ministers of State had Conferences with him, with a Design to find out how the People of India were dispos’d.

At this same Time Don Gonzalo Ronquillo, pursuant to the Orders he Ensign Duenas from Philippines to the Moluccos.had receiv’d from Spain, sent the Ensign, Francis de Duenas, from the Philippine Islands, where he was Governor, to the Moluccos, to pry into the Inclinations of the Kings, and People, Governors, and other Portugueses at Ternate, Tydore, and Bachian, as to submitting to the King of Spain. He set out in the Habit of a Chinese, and was much assisted by his Knowledge of those Countries, and their Languages, and much more by his bold Spirit, sufficiently try’d in those Wars. He artfully Learnt what Hopes there might be of the Recovery of Ternate, and how firm the People of Tydore stood. He first inquired what Leagues were carrying on in the Archipelago, what Intelligence they had with, and expected from the Northern Fleets, with whom they had now familiar Correspondence. He Travell’d about the Islands, like a Sangley, or Chinese, in the Janguas, or Trading The Intelligence he got. Vessels of the Malay, and Philippine Merchants, and had the Opportunity of viewing them all, so far as to take the Dimensions of strong Places, compute what Stores and Ammunition the Barbarians had, and discover the Humours and Inclinations of the Portugueses who Traded, or Govern’d there; and returning to the Philippine Islands, his Account, and Relation, first Encourag’d and gave Hopes that more Advantagious Enterprizes might be undertaken in those Parts, than about Malaca, tho’ it were but only Supporting the Portugueses and Tydores, then hard press’d by the King of Ternate. King Philip receiv’d this Intelligence at Lisbon, whence the Molucco Embassador was then gone, ill satisfy’d with the Answer he had; but Sultan Babu, on whom the Word of so great a Monarch, and the Authority of his Promise might perhaps have had great Effect, dy’d long before the said Embassador could come to his Presence. Sultan Babu Dies. The small Remains of Christianity still left in his Kingdom, took a little Heart, and had our Arms but appear’d upon the Revolution caus’d by his Death, the only Noise of them might have gain’d the Victory. It is Reported that furious King Babu dy’d by the excess of his Love, or rather of his inordinate Lust, in the Arms of one of his Mistresses. Some say she kill’d him with Charms, or Poison, which is the Tyrant-Slayer among those Nations, impatient of one Mans long Rule. He was Succeeded by his Brother, who was Illegitimate, as we are told by Cachil Tulo, in the Letter, which, as we shall see hereafter, he writ to the Governor of the Philippine Islands. The new King took the Name of Cachil Sultan Nait Dini Baraca Sultan Nait succeds. Xa, before whom Cachil Madraca ought to have been preferr’d, as being Son to the principal Queen. As soon as Enthron’d he offer’d Peace to his Neighbours; on this Security, and that of a clear Conscience, Cachil Gava, King of Tydore, paid him a visit. He was received with publick Rejoycings [98]in one of the greatest Squares of Ternate, and attended to a mighty lofty Arbour, provided to offer Sacrifize in, a (Chappel suitable to the Priesthood) and there to decide Controversies, and give Audience to his Subjects. When the first Complements were over, and the King of Tydore Murders the King of Tydore. least suspected any thing, the Ternate Guards, hearing the Signal given by their K. drew their Campilanes, or Cymiters, and without allowing the Guest time to cry out, fell upon, and cut him into Pieces; tho’ he was the Man thro’ whose Means the K. of Ternate had the Crown given him, contrary to the Opinion, and Designs of his Unkles. But whensoever great Returns are due to a Favour receiv’d, Ungrateful Souls convert the Obligation into Hatred, and nothing can occur to them more odious than the Sight of the Benefactor. Next he turn’d his Fury against that murder’d Princes Family, and such of his Servants as could not make their Escape to Tydore, were either Kill’d, or remain’d Prisoners at Ternate, or absconded wheresoever Fortune, and their own Confusion lead them. This cruel Fact, which some assign’d to his Father, Cachil Babu, Reconcil’d the Murderer and his Unkles. But he immediately acquainted them, how he expected to be Invaded on two Sides; that it was of the utmost Consequence, that Subjects should own their Sovereign, and fortify his Islands, especially all the upper Parts; and that since he had such Powerful Unkles, it was Reasonable, and Convenient, the People should be acquainted how firmly they were United to their Nephew. Then extolling their Valour, he with the sweetness of their Commendations so blinded and amused them, that they could not perceive the profound Jealousie he shrouded under them. Thus he divided them, that they might attend the Fortifications in distant Places; whilst New King of Tydore. he in Person carry’d on the War against the Tydores. They presently set up a Brother of their late King in his Stead; who, tho’ he govern’d with Bravery, and stuck close to the Portugueses, yet had some strong Places taken from him by the King of Ternate, which were afterwards restor’d, in our Kings Name, by Don Pedro de Acuna to the King now reigning. This Prince lived but a short Time, yet so long that Cachil Mole, who was a Child when the King his Father was murder’d, grew up, and in him the Revenge of the Injury receiv’d. He never thought, or talk’d of any other Thing, till he brought it to Execution.

In the mean while the new King of Tydore, assisted by the Spaniards he had in his Forts, provided to oppose, and attack his Enemy. They all expected Succours from India, where it was certain they must think it necessary to support Tydore, in order to recover Ternate. Their Behaviour was so brave, as to defend themselves, tho’ ill furnish’d with Arms and Provisions against those who attack’d them with Plenty of all Things. Hector Brito was come with a Galleon from India to their Assistance, and He is taken by him of Ternate. it being known at Tydore that a Storm had oblig’d him to stay on the farther Coast of Borneo, the King fitted out four Carcoas, and went to meet him, but was forced back to his Island by contrary Winds. He of Ternate watch’d to improve all Opportunities against his Enemy, and therefore would not let this Slip, nor trust to any other; but Man’d out nine Carcoas, and going in Person fell upon him. The Tydores wanted not Courage to defend themselves, and the Fight began with that Fury, which always arms those two Nations against one another; but tho’ the Tydore fought [99]desperately, he was taken, and his Men either kill’d, or dangerously wounded. This Misfortune griev’d the Portugueses no less than the Indians, because they all lov’d him. For this reason they gather’d the Remains of that Disaster, and all the other Forces they could make, offering their Service to Cachil Aleazen, Brother to the Captive King, a very hopeful Youth. Fidelity of the Tydores. He thank’d them, and was so dexterous in gaining the Affections, and confirming the Fidelity of the Subjects, that through his Care, no Man was wanting to his Duty. This Industry was of good Use, for the Conqueror did not return immediately to Ternate; but went about to his Enemies Islands, perswading the People in each of them to take an Oath of Allegiance to him, showing them their Captive King, whose Life was at his disposal; but the Tydore Towns, being furnish’d with all Necessaries, and believing they might with Safety practice that Hatred and Rage Nature has fill’d them with, would not give Ear to his Proposals, though they were mix’d with Intreaties, and Threats, and on the contrary dismiss’d him with their usual Fierceness. He perceiving that the Ostentation of his Victory, and the Sight of the Captive King availed him but little, Sail’d away for Ternate. At his Arrival, he was received with Trumpets, Kettle-Drums, and Basons they beat on, and with Songs they make for such like Occasions. The Heads and Limbs of the Tydores slain in Battel, were fix’d Cruelties of Ternates. upon the Spears they have advanc’d in the Carcoas on the Poops and Prows, and other high Places of them, and particularly the Kings. This is their way of erecting Trophies. Of the Skulls they make Cups to drink out of; like the Scithians, who, according to Herodotus, practice the same; or like the Germans, as Tacitus tells us, of the Heads of the Uri they slew, and that was a Token of Nobility. He would not trust the keeping of the King in any of his Forts; but turn’d a strong House into a Goal, and appointed him a Guard of Gilolo Islanders, well arm’d. Sometimes he show’d Severity, and otherwhiles Tenderness; but all Men knowing his Disposition, expected the End of the Captive King; tho’ at the same time they believ’d, he would mitigate his Revenge out of Respect to his Sister, the Princess of Tydore. Hector Brito, Commander of a Galeon, Hector Brito at Tydore. came now to Tydore; but his Arrival did not much mend the Posture of Affairs, tho’ those in the Fort were Encourag’d to hold out, and at least, he added some Reputation to the Cause, and inclin’d the Ternates to listen to some Overtures. However what could not be compass’d by force of Arms nor Treaty, was effected by the Resolution of an Amorous Soul.

The Princess Quisayra, Sister to King Gapabaguna, that was the Prisoner’s Remarkable Story of the Captive King’s Liberty. Name, had so great an Opinion of herself, as to hope that her Beauty would prevail to bring about that good End, which was then of Consequence to all Parties, on several Accounts. She knew she was belov’d by the King of Bachian, by him of Sian, a brave Youth, by him of Ternate her Enemy, and by other prime Sangiacks of his Kingdom, and his Kinsmen, who all publickly vy’d in doing her Honour. She was discreet enough dexterously to feed them all with such Hopes, as lay no Obligation on the Party that gives them, and yet encourage those who value them. She gave out that she would marry none but the Man that Contrivance of Quisayra, Princess of Tydore. should set her Brother at Liberty, and deliver him to her alive, or dead. This Part of the Declaration, tended to the Promoting of her Design. [100]The Promise work’d upon all her Admirers; tho’ it was most certain, that her naming herself as a Reward of the Enterprize, proceeded from the Affection she bore Ruy Diaz d’ Acunha, a Portuguese Gentleman, and Commander in Chief of the Fort of Tydore. She thought he would attempt the Rescuing of the King, and that such Success would entitle her She is in Love with the Portuguse Commander. to marry him, tho’ many suspected there was already a mutual Obligation, as well as Desire, and that they were reciprocally in Love. It was known, that they had discours’d together several Times in the House of Quinchana, a great Lady, Aunt to Quisayra, whether Ruy Diaz was wont to go frequently; and that with her Interposition the Matter had been so far concerted, that the Princess promis’d she would embrace Christianity to marry him. This made not his Rivals dismay, and the King of Ternate, upon these profer’d Hopes, offer’d to give her Brother his Liberty. However he was not regarded, because Quisayra was as averse to be beholding to him, as she was desirous to be oblig’d by Ruy Diaz. This powerful Passion informs barbarous Minds. Her Disdain caus’d the King of Tydore to be more close confin’d, and his Body to be loaded with heavy Chains, being more narrowly observ’d than before.

Cachil Salama a Lover of Quisagra, his Bravery. Cachil Salama, a Subject and near Kinsman of his, well known for his Valour in the Wars, was more deep in Love with Quisayra than all the Rest, and listen’d to all the Reports of their endeavouring to comply with her Expectation. He entirely keeping his own Council, a Thing rare in Lovers, to be secret without Affectation, that no Notice might be taken of him, one Night fitted out a Baroto, so they call a Sort of small Boat, putting into it five Tydore Soldiers, he could confide in. Thus he cross’d over the Channel to the Leeward, and landed on Ternate; where he left the Boat ready, but hid on the Shore. Then Cachil Salama, conceal’d among the Croud of trading People in the City, went to the chief Part they call Limathas, and set Fire to a House in that Ward he thought stood most convenient for his Purpose. The Flame, which had taken hold of the Roof gathering Strength, threatned a greater Conflagration. Having done this Mischief, whilst the People flock’d together, and endeavour’d to put a Stop to it with Water, and other means, Cachil return’d to his Boat, on the Inside the Ridge of Rocks there is about the Island, and went away to the other Side of the Fort, where he began to beat an Alarm, to cause the greater Confusion. This done he went ashore again, with only his Campilan, or Cimiter, ordering three of his Men to follow him at some small Distance. He found the King’s Prison almost abandon’d, the Guards being gone to help at the House that was a Fire. He went in boldly, breaking open Doors, and Bolts, till he came to the Prisoners Chamber, He rescues the King of Tydore. who scarce believing what he saw, ask’d him, with much Amazement, how he came thither, and whether the Fort of Tydore was lost? Cachil answer’d, he must be quick, and go along with him, and should afterwards be satisfy’d as to his Questions; for if he refus’d he would strike off his Head. Then laying hold of the end of the Chain, and the other three Tydores being now come up to them, they forc’d their Passage out of the House, making way with their Swords and killing such as offer’d to oppose them. The same Valour and good Fortune carry’d them through the Streets, to the Port, and leaping into their little Boat, put all their Hands to the [101]Oars. In those Islands it is usual for Kings to row, without being compell’d to it by Necessity; for as in Spain the Nobility learn to ride, so the Island Princes in all those Eastern Parts value themselves upon handling the Oars, and Sails. They cross’d over the Streight, and being pursu’d too late, by the light Vessels of Ternate, arriv’d unexpected at Tydore. The Fame of his arrival was soon spread abroad, and when certainly known, the Cannon was fir’d, the flat Drums in the Temples were beaten, and the Bells rung, the Sound whereof uses to draw the People of the Moluccos together, and in short there was a general Rejoycing, without quitting their Arms. All Men cry’d up Cachil Salama to the Skies, calling him the Deliverer of Tydore, and Neza Maluco, Neza signifies a Spear, and Maluco a Kingdom, and both together the Spear, that is, the Defence of the Kingdom.

Only Quisayra was troubled at this Event, because the general Promise Quisayra contrives to murder Cachil Salama. she had made of marrying, whosoever perform’d it, was only design’d for Ruy Diaz de Acunha. She was not able to conceal this Truth; especially when Cachil Salama boldly press’d the Performance of the Promise, the King himself seconding him. She delay’d him, alledging some specious Pretences to gain Time. She would willingly have made her Complaint to Ruy Diaz himself, either to shame, or provoke him to Passion. She easily compass’d to meet him at her Aunts, where, as soon as she began to Discourse, there was nothing but Tears, Complaints, Excuses, and Contrivances to murder Salama, to conclude a Reconciliation. Rocque Pinheyro the Commander’s Nephew, and a Soldier of reputed Valour, was present at this Discourse. Quisayra trusting him with her secret Thoughts, he Pinheyro undertakes to murder him and his own Unkle. boldly, and with Art, gave her to understand that his Unkle was as slack as before; and since he had been so in the other Affair, what could be expected from him in what he now promis’d. He said, if she could prevail upon her self to be sensible of the Ingratitude of Ruy Diaz, and to substitute him in his Place, he would not only murder Cachil, but his own Unkle too. That out of the Respect due to her high Qualities, he had not till then presum’d to let her know how deeply he was in Love with her Beauty; but that he now thought himself absolv’d from all human Tyes, and wholly confin’d by that. Pinheyro had a full hearing, an Advantage not far remote from being admitted; and tho’ he was not commanded to murder his Unkle, yet he perceiv’d he had not left him so well in the Princesses Esteem as he was before.

In the mean while, Cachil Salama was not idle, pressing the Business hastily, Salama convey’d into Quisayra’s Bed Chamber. and having got some Inkling, or suspecting the Cause of the Delay, like a true Lover who is seldom deceiv’d in this Sort of Jealousy, he found out the Truth. By the Contrivance of one of Quisayra’s Women, he durst presume to hide himself in her Bedchamber; and in the dead of the Night, he suddenly appear’d before her, his Fiercness being overcome by a Superior Power. The Princess was surpriz’d, but dissembled it, and prepar’d to defend herself in Case Violence were offer’d. She threatned to cry out; utter’d Complaints with Tears, and bewail’d the loss of her Reputation, saying, how could they think her Innocent, who saw him either come in, or go out. Salama all the while in humble Posture, and on his Knees, assur’d her he had no other Design, than to put her in Mind of the Obligation she lay under, and that since it was known he was to be her Husband, [102]his being seen was of no Consequence. That her Reputation suffer’d more, by the delaying of the marriage; and that to convince her of his Affection, he would be gone as obediently as he had always done. He went He gains her Affection. out immediately, comforted with Thanks, and Hopes; and deliver’d her from the Fear she had conceiv’d of him. She was so taken with this Courteous Action, that resolving it in her Mind, it wrought so much, as to settle her Affection on Salama; so that she would have marry’d him, tho’ he had not oblig’d her before.

At this time Pinheyro, who was already engaged in her Love, either to obtain its Reward, or because his Unkle did not Favour him as he expected, Pinheyro murders his Unkle, and is kill’d by Salama. or for both Reasons, contriv’d his Death. As he was going one Day to the Palace, to acquaint Quisayra that the Murder was already committed, Cachil happened than to come from a Fort to see his Mistress. He seeing Pinheyro coming out of her Apartment, drew his Campilan, or Cymiter, and tho’ the Youth fought Manfully, and like a Lover, yet Cachil, who had the same Qualifications, and was Jealous over and above, at the first onset clove his Head, so furiously, that he dropt down dead of the Wound. Then proceeding as he had begun, he went in where Quisayra was, whom He marries Quisayra. he easily perswaded to be gon with him, and leaving the Palace full of Confusion, they Imbark’d in the Baroto, or small Boat that brought him. They Marry’d with the good liking of the King and Kingdome, and the Loss of those two Gentlemen’s Lives. And since among the Portuguese Nation, as much Account is made of Honour gain’d, or lost in Love Affairs, as was formerly of Victories obtain’d in Greece, at the Olympick Games, the Vindication of these Lovers shall be left to the Management of those who are well skil’d in that Matter, to whom we refer our selves.

The Portugueses were much griev’d at this Disaster, as being Publick, and the King was so incens’d, that one of them having accidentally kill’d A Portuguese hang’d. a Horse he had a great Value for, he caus’d him to be Hang’d, without hearkning to any thing that could be said for him. This gain’d Cachil Mole so generally the Affections of all Men, that tho’ Cachil Cota was Elder, and Son to the principal Queen, by them call’d Putriz, under colour that the latter was a Friend to the King of Ternate, and about to contract Affinity with him, the other gain’d the greater Party, which advanc’d him to Succeed in the Throne of Tydore, as we shall soon see.

The Portuguese Galeons arrived at Malaca, and in them Cachil Naique returning from Spain, and having stay’d there some Months for the Monsons, Nayque returns to Ternate. he had a good Voyage, and arrived safe at Ternate, when he had by the way sollicited the Javaneses, and the People of Achem and Borneo, not to admit of the Spanish Domination. He brought no acceptable Answer from King Philip, and found the King who had employ’d him Dead, and in his Place another, so different from the Former, that he entertain’d no Thoughts of restoring the Forts to the Portugueses, but on the contrary, aim’d at casting off all Obedience, and obliterating their Name. To this effect he Confederated with the English, who, with other Northern English at Ternate. Nations, Lorded it in the Island. Five Leagues from it lay at Anchor an English Ship, waiting for two others that came out with her. They Anchor’d in the Port, and went ashore, as if they had been in London, being well receiv’d by the Sultan, with whose Leave they settled a Factory in [103]the City, where they left Officers, who under the name of Trade, were more absolute Masters of it than the Natives. They dispers’d to gather in the Clove for the Goods they brought to Barter; and on the 21st. of August dispatch’d their Ships, loaded with that Spice, and with those Nuts they call of Molucco, and excellent Preserves of them both. In these Ships went Embassadors to Queen Elizabeth, and to the Prince of Orange, carrying Presents suitable to those Persons, of the most valuable Things in India. They were order’d to offer the Queen his Kingdome in Vassalage, and his Friendship to the Prince of Orange. The Advantage of these Embassies afterwards appear’d; yet he did not on that Account give any hopes of Restoring Christianity; for besides that the Persecution grew more violent, he had at that time brought over into his Kingdome, a great number of Arabian and Persian false Prophets, all of them Mahomet’s Priests and Ministers, Mahometan Preachers at Ternate. to strengthen that Sect. Besides, being inform’d by his Spies, That it was given out in the Philippine Islands, That they would make War on him that way, and that in Spain the King promis’d the Union of the two Crowns should produce the Conjunction of their Power and Arms, for the punishing of disobedient Tyrants, he slighted no Alliance, nor contemn’d the Weakest Enemy. For this Reason, he gave Entertainment, and allow’d the planting of Colonies to Europeans, and Leagued with Idolaters and Mahometans, who hate Spain, as their common Enemy. The English Ships now frequented India, facilitating the Passage, and shewing an Example to the French and Dutch, which encourag’d them all to venture out far from their Countries, and seek for Treasure in strange ones.

Sultan Capabaguna did not long enjoy his Liberty at Tydore. He was King of Ternate dies. taken ill at an Entertainment. Some believe he had a slow Poison given him; because he was very moderate in Eating, and those motions of his Arms, the gnashing of his Teeth, and losing of his Senses, which attend the Falling-Sickness, and are Simptoms of Apoplexies, could not naturally proceed from his Temperate way of Living; but are always caused by much Excess, which Occasions this violent Distemper. He came to himself after that first Fit, but his Vigour wasted, and he linger’d on to the end of his Life. Cachil Cotta should have Succeeded him, but they were suspicious of his Correspondence with the Ternates; and they all so openly favour’d his Brother Cachil Mole, that there was not the least Difficulty made about the Succession. He often remember’d his Fathers unfortunate Death, and in Regard that this raging Desire of Revenge, might prove instrumental for the Recovery of Ternates; as soon as his Unkle Dy’d, which was on the 24th of April 1599, the Portuguese Commander in Chief, Ruy Gonzalez de Sequeyrao repair’d to his Palace, and by Means of the Portuguese Cachil Mole King of Tydore. Power and Arms, caused Cachil Mole to be sworn King, as being a most faithful Friend to his Nation, and no less an Enemy to the Ternates. He immediatly dispatch’d Captain Palma with this News to Manila, and with it an Account of the Molucco Islands, of their Neighbours, and of their Preparations; because they were then providing in the Philippine Islands for this War, to extirpate this Receptacle of Sects, where all sorts of Apostasies are admitted, and particularly the vile Doctrines of Mahomet. Ever since the Year 1555, when the Dutch enter’d those Seas, they have [104]not, till this Time, ceas’d bringing in Sectaries, and Captains of Pyrates: These Men carry away the Wealth of Asia, and in Lieu of it leave behind them that false Doctrine, which renders the Conversion of so many Souls Fruitless.

The Forgetfulness, or Contempt the Governours of India show’d for Moluccos slighted at Goa. the Molucco Islands, seem’d fatal; since they refus’d, or with-held the usual Succours, abandoning the Commanders, and Forts, for so many Years, as if they had not been in the World. This was not remedy’d by the Union of the Crowns of Spain and Portugal; on the contrary, the great Success of the Adelantado, or Lord Lieutenant Legaspe, in the Islands Luzones, which he call’d Philippines, being known in Spain, King Philip the IId. thought fit as we shall soon see, that the Molucco Islands, and Parts adjacent, whither he was Zealous to send Evangelical Preachers, should be sensible of the Advantage of his Neighbouring Empire. This was Relief order’d from the Philippines, and why. speedily order’d, and tho’ the Effects were not sutable, by Reason of the many Accidents great Undertakings are liable to, yet Time has shown how convenient it was to fix that Resolution. For the better understanding of the Reasons on which it was grounded; since one of them proceeded from the various Disposition, Qualities, and Interests of the Nations throughout those Seas and Lands; it will be absolutely necessary in this Place to make them known, before we come to Particulars.

Description of China. The Country of the Sinæ, whom we call Chineses, is the uttermost of the Continent of Asia. On the East and South it is encompass’d by the Ocean, which the Ancients call’d Sericus. On the West, it reaches to the Borders of the farther India; and on the North to those of the Massagetes and Scythians. Their Ancient Annals, Writings and Traditions informs us, that the Chineses extended their Empire much further. This is verify’d by the Remains of sumptuous Structures; and not only in Ruins, wherein their former Magnificence is still apparent, but even in Cities, which Time has preserv’d, tho’ not inhabited, and yet to be seen in the Provinces they have excluded their Limits. There are many which take there Denomination, and own their Original from China. For that immense Empire finding it self labouring under its own Power, and overburden’d with its Magnitude, like a judicious Patient, to prevent more Harm, it breath’d the Veins, and brought down the Redundancy of the Body. The same we read the Carthagenians did, when in the like Condition, and for the same Reasons. It confin’d it self to a narrower Compass, proportionable to the Extent of humane Providence, that so their Prince’s Light might reach to shine over, and be communicated to them; which cannot be, when the Circumference is too great for the Darting of the Beams. They publish’d indispensable Decrees against such as go out Chineses contract their Empire. of China, without leave from the Magistrates. They abandon’d vast Provinces, which being left expos’d to Tyranny, and Infidelity, after tedious Wars, submitted to the most Potent. Hence the Kings of India took their Original, being oblig’d never to lay down their Arms, nor keep any Faith, so to support themselves one against another, till a greater Power subdues them.

15 Kingdoms in China. In China they reckon 15 maritime Kingdoms, or Provinces of an extraordinary Extent, with each its Metropolis, or Capital; the rest are up the [105]Inland. The most part of it lies within temperate Climates, and receives into its pure and open Bosome the Sun’s vital Rays, having a healthful, and serene pleasant air. This favourable Disposition renders it so fruitful, Fertility, Air, Populousness. that it yearly yields two or three crops. The great Industry of the Tillers, is a considerable Addition to its Fertility. The Number of them is infinite, being a People that daily multiply exceedingly, because they are forbid going into foreign Countries. Neither is any among such a numerous Multitude of Men allow’d to live idle. Idleness is not only exposed Idleness punish’d. to private Contempt, and the Scoffs of Neighbours, but punish’d by publick Custome and Law. Thus the Peasants leave not the least Spot of Ground untill’d. The Hills and deep Bottoms produce Vines and Pine-Trees; the Plains, Rice, Barley, Wheat, and other common Grain. Tho’ they do not press the Grapes for the Wine, as we do, yet they keep them Product, Tea. to eat; and of the Herb call’d Chia, they make a wholesome hot Liquor. This they drink, as do the Japoneses, and it preserves them from Colds, Head-Aches, Rheums in the Eyes, and makes them live long and healthy. Some Parts of the Country want Olive-Trees, but they are not destitute of other Plants, which yield a Liquor to anoint them. There is a perpetual Abundance of Pasture, Fruits, Flowers, and all Products of Gardens. Rivers, Ports, &c. There are many Navigable Rivers, carrying Ships of great Burden, and full of excellent Fish; the Banks cover’d with perpetual Greens, spacious Harbours, and a Trade in them of all Things necessary for humane Life. The Fowl are of various colour’d Feathers, and pleasant and nourishing to eat; great Numbers of large Deer; vast Lakes, Woods and Mountains, and Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and other Metals; besides Pearls and precious Stones. Its Purcelane, or Earthen Ware, is not to be imitated in the World; and it affords rich Furs against the Cold, Silks, Wooll, Cotton, and Flax; nor is there any End of its Sugar, Honey, Amber, Vermilion, and Lake. Musk, whereof no mention is found among Greek and Latin Authors, is more plentiful in China than in other Parts.

The People are most passionately addicted to Delight, and Lasciviousness. The People. They alone always sell all Things; they buy nothing that Nature or Art affords, either for Sustenance, or Cloathing, except some Perfumes for their Cloaths, and Pepper out of India; nor would there be any Place for Foreign Trade, did not an insatiable Avarice of Gold and Silver predominate among the Chineses. What they draw out of the Bowels of the Mines, they conceal as carefully as if it were still in them; and even that they bring from remote Provinces, they heap up, and bury. Their publick and private Structures would make up a Narration of extraordinary Length. We are told of 200 Cities of an extraordinary Magnitude, Cities. and many more of inferior Degree, besides Towns, Castles, and Villages, containing above 3000 Families each, built of Bricks made of the same Clay as our Purcelane, or China Ware, and these encompass’d with continu’d Woods, Springs and Rivers. In all these there are Towers with stately Pinnacles, Pleasure-Houses, and Temples, tho’ hideously painted, yet costly, with Variety of deform’d Images, through which the Devils give their Answers. But these are not in all Parts, for many of them know no God, nor Religion. Life, they say, was from Eternity [106]common to, and alike in all living Creatures. That at first Men drank Barbarous Opinions. humane Blood, and eat raw Meat. That afterwards the Use of Reason provided for Necessity, and Pleasure; inventing the Ways of dressing, and seasoning Meat at the Fire, in Vessels and other Utensils. The same, they say, happen’d in Regard to Man’s Nakedness. So that Man is indebted to himself alone for what he enjoys, and therefore whosoever lay’d on him the Burden of Religion, and the owning of a Cause Superior to Nature, only aim’d at the dejecting him, and exercising a Tyranny over his Liberty. With these impious Notions, and destructive Atheism, they oppose their Eternal Salvation, which our Arms, and our Preachers invite them to. They only regard Generation; but not without Distinction. Lawful Matrimony entitles Women to be Mistresses of their Families. The Matrons Chastity. value themselves upon being highly Chast. Concubines are kept in Houses apart. They do not want for Plays, and such Representations; and they delight in seeing their Traditions, whether true or fabulous, acted on the Stage. They use Entertainments, and have Tables and Chairs of Ebony, and other precious Materials; as also Shipping, Shows, Carts, Horse-Litters, and the Exercise of Arms, and Riding.

Customs, and Manners. It were no difficult Matter to give an Account here of their private Customs and Manners, were they to our Purpose. Something shall be said of the Publick and Political, for the better Understanding of some Things that happen’d in the Philippine Islands, from whence the Recovery of the Moluccos, in our Times, had its Beginning. They call their great Government. Men Loyties, from among whom the King chuses his Judges and Counsellors. There is almost an infinite Number of inferiour Magistrates, who exercise the Regal Power and Authority, even in the most inconsiderable Cases. In every Town there are five, that have the greatest Power, and these are Strangers in the Place, that they may be free from Partiality. Tutan a Viceroy. The Head of them all, is call’d Tutan, being the same as a Viceroy in Poncasio. Europe. The next in Dignity is the Poncasio, who has Charge of the King’s Taxes, and Royal Treasure, with a great Number of Clerks, and other Ancasio. Officers; and he pays all Salaries and Pensions. Next follows the Ancasio, Aitan. who is chief Justice, in Criminal Cases of Consequence. The Aitan has the Inspection of all Martial Affairs, he musters the Armies, builds the Ships, and his principal Duty is to observe the Guards, that no Stranger Luitisio. may pass into the Inland Country. The Luitisio is next to the Aitan in Dignity, and is to be expert in War, in which he is employ’d by the Aitan. I know there are other Magistrates, and their Names and Dignities, which I must pass over in Silence. All of them except the Luitisio, keep great State. There are ten chosen Persons of the Council, tho’ not equal in Authority. Five of them sit on the Right, the others on the Left. The King often thrusts in among the Judges and Parties in Disguize, to pry into the Causes, and their Decisions, and be certainly inform’d of both. When he thinks fit, he sometimes makes himself known; and the Moment he discovers himself, they all stand Mute, full of Respect and Astonishment, listening to what he shall command. Then he commends or reproves either Party, and rewards, or punishes before he Mandarines. departs the Court. His Mandarines, and Prime Ministers are so highly respected, that no Man dares look them in the Face, and they always look [107]so Stern, that it would be thought a great Disorder to lose the least of their Gravity, tho’ it were but with a modest Smile. This they observe, when they pass thro’ the Streets, in Sight of the People. The greatest Honour among them is to wear a Cymiter with a gold Pommel, and a yellow Hat.

When the President of the Council Dies, the eldest Judge succeeds him. Judges. These go Circuits thro’ the Provinces, and reform Abuses, and all of them wear the King’s Badge on their Shoulders, and Breasts, being a Golden Dragon wove in the Cloth. When they go these Progresses, they save, or lessen the Charge by circumscribing the State. When first elected, at their taking Possession of their Posts, they generally go out attended by Troops of Horse and Foot, with all Sorts of Musick, and Splendour. Their Pomp appears in the Hanging, and other Ornaments of the Streets and Houses. All the expence of Law Suits, Courts, and other Perquisites is allow’d out of the King’s Exchequer. The Mandarines are Governors, and Viceroys. In China there are no Dukes, Marquesses, or Earls, nor do they own any Dignity, but what is deriv’d from the King’s Authority. Though in the Parts next to Scythia, or Tartary, some People are Mahometans; yet in all Religion. others they are either Idolaters, or look upon the Notion of a God as a meer Jest. They believe the Life and Death of Men and Beasts are alike. There is nothing they are more attentive to, than the obstructing of any foreign Religion, and this under the politick Pretence, that they are jealous of Innovation. But above all they oppose the true Religion, hating that they know nothing of; and are as much afraid of it, as if its Ministers went arm’d to preach it, and with the Noise of Drums, and Trumpets, and regular Armies. They are frighted at a few bare-foot, and almost naked Men who profess Poverty, and preach up Morality, and supernatural Virtues, grounded on Humility and Peace. They have such an Aversion for them, that were it proper to our Subject, or were there not printed Relations thereof already, we would recount several Instances, to show their unreasonable Hatred. Hence may be inferr’d, how much more Need of the special Grace of Heaven these Nations stand in, with those in the Neighbourhood, which are expos’d to the Infection and Danger of their Obstinacy. The Reader ought also to consider, that tho sometimes, the Avarice, and other Crimes of our Commanders, and Soldiers interfere with the Preaching of the Gospel, yet their Offences do not lessen the Iustice of the Cause. He is also to reflect, that, allowing his Majesty, for weighty Reasons of State should, as we have said was propos’d, resolve to abandon those Parts of Asia, as the Chineses did, and circumscribe the Compass of his Monarchy; yet the Cause of Religion would not permit it. Our Kings are its Ministers, and Sons of the Catholick Church, and any War made for the Propagation of the Gospel, is of the greatest Consequence, and highly gainful, tho’ it be to acquire, or recover desert Provinces. Besides that the Philippine Islands have shown us how tractable their Natives are, and how much they improve with the Example, and Society of the Spaniards, and how affectionately they have imbrac’d the Faith, and assist the Religious Men, who dilate, and carry it over into China, Japan, Camboxa, Mindanao, the Moluccos, and other Islands, where still Idolatry continues, or the Friendship with the Devils left them by their antient Masters, when they excluded [108]them their Dominions, or else the Mahometan Fictions, which they have since imbrac’d.

This is the Principal End of keeping those Provinces; and the Revenues and Wealth which is consum’d upon them, and several others, are laid out upon the Forces, and Preparations Spain makes for the Preaching and Security of the Ministers of the Church. Besides, that as Times have alter’d, Rumours of Chinese Invasions. so they have often in China chang’d their Opinion, and show’d they repented their having diminish’d their Empire. No Year passes over with out Threats of Chinese Armies; of their Listing Men; of building Ships; of their solemn consecrating, or dedicating them to their carv’d Gods, or to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are ador’d in some Parts, begging Success in their vain Prayers against the Spaniards, who are possess’d of those Countries they abandon’d, thro’ their own Indiscretion. This short Account of the Chineses, or Sangleys, is here inserted, for the better understanding of those Actions we shall soon treat of. They not only oppose the Truth; but tho’ they are wholly addicted to their Interest, and Slaves to Gain, and tho’ it be so absolutely requisite for the attaining of those Ends through their Industry and Trade, to maintain Amity with their Neighbours, yet there is nothing less to be reliy’d on than their Faith, or to give it a more proper Name, their Dissimulation. Happy those People, if when China withdrew its Dominion, it had also with drawn the Errors of its Worship.

The End of the Fourth Book.

[109]

THE
HISTORY
OF THE
Discovery and Conquest
OF THE
Molucco and Philippine Islands, &c.
BOOK V.
The Islands Luzones, or Manilas, which are both of them antient Names, having been discover’d by Magellan; after his Death, and various Accidents befallen his Companions, Sebastian Sebastian Cano the first that sail’d round the World. Cano return’d to Spain in that renowned Ship, call’d the Victory, as it were to express her Voyage, which is not so likely as true. Sebastian Cano, was born in the Town of Guetaria, on the Pyrenean Mountains, as we are told by Massæus, in his Latin History, where he extols Cano’s mighty Resolution, and skill in the Art of Navigation. He tell us with what Respect and Admiration all Men look’d on him, as the first that went round this Globe, which is the Habitation of Mortals. And in Truth what value shall we henceforward put upon the Fabulous Argonauts, Tiphys, Jason, and all other Sailers, so much celebrated by the Greek Eloquence, or Vanity, if compar’d with our Cano? He was the first Witness of the Communication of the two Seas, to whom Nature disclos’d what she had till then reserv’d for his Discovery, suffering herself to be entirely lay’d open, as a Beginning of such Bold Enterprizes of that Law which serves, and renders us Immortal.

Islands Lusones call’d Philippines. Magellan being dead, the islands Lusones, which ought to have inherited his Name for being his Place of Burial, as the Streight did for his discovering and passing it, in the year 1565, chang’d theirs for that of Philippines, tho’ those of that Eastern Archipelago bear the same. The Adelantado, or Lord Lieutenant Michael de Legaspe, sent from New-Spain, by the Viceroy Don Lewis de Velasco, with a Spanish Fleet arriv’d at these Islands. He first conquer’d that of Zebu, and its Neighbours, where he spent six Legaspe the first Conqueror. Years. These Islands, as there are several Names given to divers of those Parts, are call’d Pintados, because then the Indians went naked, and their Bodies wrought and painted of several Colours. He left a Garrison there, [110]Luzon Island subdu’d. and went over to possess himself of Luzon, 150 Leagues from Zebu. He fought the Barbarians, who after the first Surprize, caus’d by our Arms, Ships, and Countenances, differing from theirs, was over, were encourag’d by that very Novelty. Legaspe ran into a Bay, four Leagues over at the Mouth, where is an Island now call’d Marivelez. The Bay runs thirty Leagues up to the City Manila, and is eight Leagues over, lying North-West, and South-East. The Inhabitants of this City oppos’d him with more Bravery than the Pintados; because they had Cannon, and a Fort, but as soon as they saw that taken by the Spaniards, they submitted. This was done so expeditiously that the Country had not time to come in; and thus he enter’d Manila, a Place strong by Nature. At a Point of it, which is shut in by the Waters of the Bay, a considerable River empties it self, which rises in the Great Lake call’d Vay, five Leagues Distant. This Point which at first is narrow and sharp, presently widens, because the Sea-coast runs away to the South South-East, and the River West, leaving a most Manila City. spacious Spot for the City, which is all encompass’d with Water, except that part which lyes to the South-West. Legaspe then built it of Wood, whereof there is great plenty in those parts. The Roofs he cover’d, or Thatch’d with the Leaves of Nipa, which is like our Sedge, or Sword-Grass, and a sufficient Fence against the Rains; but a Combustible Matter, and the occasion of Great Conflagrations, which have often hapned.

Luzon Island describ’d. Luzon is more Populous than any of the other Islands, which in Honour of King Philip the Second, were call’d Philippines, and which some affirm are in Number 11000. The Compass of Luzon is 350 Leagues. It runs without the Bay 100 Leagues to the Northward, as far as New Segovia; and from where this Province commences, which is at Cape Bojador, and 70 Leagues from it, turns to the Eastward, to the Promontory del Enganno; from thence along the Coast to the South, 80 Leagues; then turning again to that they call Embocadero, or the Mouth, being the Streight against the Island Tandaya, 40 Leagues, and this is 80 from the Bay. So that it bears the shape of a Square, and in it several Bays, and few good Harbours. It lyes in 160 Degrees Longitude, reckoned from the Canaries, the Southermost Part in 14 Degrees of North Latitude, and the Northermost in 19. On that Side of it lyes China, separated from it by the Sea 60 Leagues over; and the Islands of Japan, 250 Leagues distant. On the East is the Vast Ocean; on the South is the greatest of all the Archipelagos, divided into five, and those again rent into so many Islands, Kingdoms, and Provinces, as if Nature had resolv’d that Man should never determine their Number. The most known are the two Javas, our Moluccos, Borneo, and New Guinea. On the West of Luzon, at 300 Leagues, and greater Distances, lye Malaca, Siam, Patan, Camboxa, Cochin-china, and several other Provinces on the Continent of Asia. The Chineses forsook their Habitations in our Philippine Islands, but not the Trade. Neither did the Worship they had introduc’d cease, nor their Fertility. Product, and Trade. They produce plenty of Corn, and other necessary Grain; Deer, Cows, Buffaloes, Goats, and Wild Boars; Fruit, and Sweets; and if any be wanting the Chincheo Chineses bring it, as they do Porcelane, and Silks. The Wine they use, and always drank, is drawn from the Palm, or rather Coco Trees, cutting off the Clusters of the Fruit they produce, when Green, [111]and taking off the Nipples of them, they gather the Water that runs from them, and Boil it in Jars, till it becomes so strong, that it makes Men drunk, in the same manner as the strongest Spanish Wine. Of its Natural Growth, the Island has Oranges, Lemmons, and most delicious Citrons; of Spanish Fruit, Figs, and Pears. There are Numerous Breeds of Sparrow-Hawks, Birds. Birds like small Herons, and Eagles, besides sundry Sorts of Parrots, and other large and small Fowl. In the Rivers and Lakes there are many Monstrous Crocodils, or Alligators. These easily kill the Indians, Alligators. and especially Boys, who happen unadvisedly to come where they are, and the Cattle that goes into the Water to drink. It often happens, they lay hold of their Snouts, or Noses, and draw them under Water, where they are drown’d, without being able to defend themselves; then they drag the Carcass to the Shore, and devour it. An Alligator being kill’d a whole Buffaloes Head has been found some times in the Belly, and yet in that Country they are as big as the largest Ox in Spain. The Alligators lay Eggs as the Tortoises do, about the bigness of Goose-Eggs, and so hard that they will scarce break, tho’ struck against a Stone with main Force. They are Hatch’d by burying in the Sand, near the edge of the Water; the moisture whereof, with the Heat of the Sun forms the young Ones. There are some Indians so brave, that as fierce as these Creatures How the Indians fight the Alligators. are, they kill them with their Hands. They arm the left up to the Arm with a Glove of Buffalo’s Hide. They hold in it a Stick, or small Stake, somewhat above a Foot long, and as thick as a Man’s Wrist, and sharpned at both Ends, with which they go into the Water up to the Waste: The Crocodile makes up to the Indian, gaping to swallow him, and he holding out his Arm that is arm’d, and the Hand with the Stake in it, for the Monster to bite at, claps it across his Mouth, so that he cannot shut it, or make use of his Teeth to hurt him. The Alligator feeling the hurt of the sharp pointed Stick, is so dismayed that he neither makes resistance, nor offends, nor dares so much as move, because the least strugling gauls him. Then the Indian holding fast the Stake, with a Ponyard he has in his other Hand, Wounds the Creature so often about the Gills, till it bleeds to Death. Then he drags it ashore with Ropes and Noozes, many Indians joyning to draw, and there is need of many, considering the Bulk of those Crocodiles. They are shap’d like Lizards, but arm’d with such strong Shells, that a Musket-shot makes little Impression on them, and they are scarce to be hurt, but only about the Gills, and under their short Legs, where Nature has plac’d a sort of sweet Odour, which the Indians make their Advantage of. These Islands, besides the Cattel, produce all that is found in Africk, as Tygers, Lions, Bears, Foxes, Monkeys, Beasts. Apes, Squirrels, and some of them Abundance of Civet-Cats, which are much Hunted, in order to be sent into several Countries, with other Commodities of China; Callicoes, Silks, Porcelane, Iron, Copper, Steel, Commodities. Quicksilver, and many more Yearly Transported from those Countries. The Religion and Government is now the same as in Spain; but in those which are not yet subdu’d, they follow an Extravagant Idolatry; believing the Soul Immortal, but wandering from one Body to another, according to that ridiculous Transmigration invented or published by Pythagoras. They are much addicted to Trade, and forwarded in it by the Commerce [112]with China. The Philippine People are braver than their Neighbours; the Spaniards and their Breed do not degenerate from their Original.

An Army was now forming of all these Sorts of People, by Order of the King, to attempt recovering the Forts of the Moluccos. Don Ronquillo de Pennalosa was then Governour there; and tho’ he had receiv’d some Intelligence Ronquillo’s Preparations for the Moluccos. brought him thence by Spies and Traders, yet not satisfy’d with it, he sent thither another Soldier. He disguised himself, and being like the Natives in Countenance, and speaking their Language to Perfection, got to Tydore. He found our People very earnest to forward that Enterprize, and that King ready to support it with all his Power. Thence he pass’d over to Ternate, among Merchants, where he view’d the Forts, the Shoals of the Harbours; observ’d their Correspondence with the English, and took notice how they Landed, and Traded in all Safety, or rather with Authority. Nor was he unacquainted with the Numbers of conceal’d Christians, who would take up Arms when a seasonable Opportunity was offer’d, or any other Particular, which belong’d to a Judicious Spy to enquire into. Hereupon Ronquillo gather’d about 300 Spaniards, and above 1500 Natives The Forces sent under Sarmiento. of the Philippines, with Ammunition, Provisions, and Seamen, and at the proper Season sent them for the Moluccos in three Great Ships, and a considerable Number of Small Ones. Peter Sarmiento, a brave and experienc’d Officer, still living in those Islands, when this was writ, went as General. He had Courage, and Force to destroy any of the Enemies that then frequented those Seas. His Majesty had some time before bestow’d the Government of Ternate, if it were Conquer’d, on Paul de Lima; and Paul de Lima rich in the Moluccos. allow’d his Brother Francis de Lima to make two Voyages to the Moluccos, in Consideration of their Services, and those of Henry their Father. Paul was Marry’d to a Christian, and devout Lady, tho’ a Kinswoman to the King of Ternate, who was not so. For this Reason, and because he had been possess’d in Ternate, of the ancient Inheritance of the Villages of Guita, Mofaquia, Mofaguita, Pavate, Pelveri, Sansuma, Takane, Mayloa, and Soma; and in the Island of Machian of Sabele, Talapao, Talatoa, Mofabonana, Tabaloga, Tagono, Bobaba, and Molapa; and in Regard the King of Ternate, had expell’d him most of them, as also of Bitua in Tydore, and several other Places, he went over to Manila, as a Banish’d Man, where he confer’d with the Governour, about the means of facilitating the Conquest, just before it was put in Execution. His Advice was of use, and he gave it, as one so nearly concern’d; for besides the Inheritance the King of Ternate wrongfully with-held from him, he hop’d to recover the Island of Moutil, which belong’d to his Forefathers. The Enterprize was farther Authoriz’d by the Presence of Don John Ronquillo, Don John Ronquillo joyn’d with Sarmiento. the Governour’s Nephew, who had equal Power with Sarmiento, both by Sea and Land. If any thing was wanting, they thought the Defect would easily be supply’d by the Valour of the Soldiers, the Celerity of the Passage, and the Enemies Surprize; but the divided Command was an Obstacle to their Hopes.

The Weather prov’d not very cross, yet neither was it so favourable, as that they could come directly to anchor at Ternate, as would have been most convenient to deceive the Watchfulness of the Enemy. They arriv’d at Moutil, and fought a Parcel of Janguas in Sight of Land; which Spaniards arrive at and take Moutil. [113]were taken, and the Christians in them set at Liberty. Paul de Lima being well acquainted with the Bays, and there being no sufficient Force in the Island to withstand a Fleet, it easily submitted, when attack’d in several Parts. The Natives came out with Palm, Citron, and Clove-Tree Branches, in Token of Peace, and to beg Pardon. Both were granted, and Paul de Lima appointed their Lord, tho’ his New Dominion turn’d to little Account, for within a few Days, all the People slipp’d away, either because they thought themselves safer at Ternate, or to meet the Enemy, who of Necessity must carry the War over into that Island, as it happen’d. Here Sarmiento refitted the Ships, and being over-joy’d with this Success, Sarmiento in Ternate. obtain’d without the Loss of one Man, arriv’d at Talangame, passing amidst the Enemies Carcoas, which they had fitted out in a Hurry. The King expected him long before in the Fort, well furnish’d with our Cannon, particularly the Bastion they had enlarg’d, and call’d Cachil Tulo, from the King’s Uncle, who made it, and these Preparations seem’d to threaten any Disaster. Our Men landed on that Side, and were oppos’d by the Ternates; but Night put an End to the Fight, and both Parties retiring to their Fastnesses, our Cannon was landed, and planted in the Place, and after such Manner as Paul de Lima directed, and ever since he commanded it in the Fort of Tydore. The King of this Island was willing to joyn our Camp, as had appear’d by some of his Actions, and his Promises to the Ensign Duennas; but he mistrusted the Fortune of the Spaniards, as if he King of Tydore dubious. had not had sufficient Experience of it. The Opportunity and Fidelity now invited him, and yet he forbore; his Doubtfulness is thought to have been prejudicial to the Success. Sarmiento having planted his Cannon, intrench’d himself, and taking some Prisoners, of whom he learn’d what Provisions and Amunition the Besieged had, began to press on, and batter them furiously; yet they were not discourag’d, but answer’d boldly. It was found convenient to possess the upper Grounds, which over-looking the Place, tho’ they have been since levell’d, our Men much incommoded the Enemy, and had they continu’d it, that would have put an End to the War. However there was so much Sickness in the Camp, that no Remedy Fort of Ternate batter’d. was found against it, but going off so to save themselves for a more favourable Season. The Succours which came as Duties from Tydore, were very inconsiderable; the Allies were cold, and all Things weak; what other Causes there were Heaven knows. It is likely there were some of The Siege raised. more Moment, for in short the Army broke up, and reimbark’d for Manila, without doing any thing but adding to the Enemies Resolution.

At that Time, only the English Nation disturb’d the Spanish Sovereignty in those Eastern Parts; for this Reason, King Philip was desirous, not only for the present to curb them by Force of Arms, but to make them an Example to all other Nations, that they might not spread themselves abroad to attempt such Invasions, as we are Eye-Witnesses to. This Work was undertaken in the Year 1588, but first happen’d what we are now to State of Affairs in Europe. relate. Queen Elizabeth of England, after a tedious Imprisonment, beheaded Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland, for some Politick Reasons, or Fictions. The then King of Scotland, and since of England also, Son to the Martyr, arm’d his People, strengthen’d his Garrisons, and invaded the Dominions of the Enemy, who had caus’d him to be Motherless; and [114]more particularly the Marches about the River Tweed, and those of Anandale, water’d by the River Solway. The Queen call’d Home the Earl of Leicester, who was in Holland, appointed him General, and War broke out in all those Northern Provinces, with apprehensions of greater to ensue. Queen Elizabeth’s Practices. After many Events, which do not belong to this Place, Queen Elizabeth strengthned her Alliance with the Dutch, encouraging those Provinces to persist in their Disobedience to the Church, and to King Philip, and advising them, since the King had forbid them trading in all the Rest of his Dominions, to go over into India, there to raise Commotions, and rob him of the Spice. The more safely to compass her Designs, she supported the Flemmings Obstinacy, flattering herself with the Hopes of a new Monarchy, for the acquiring whereof, she propos’d to make use of the Wealth yearly brought from the North and South Seas, for Spain, the Robbing of which had already made an Addition to her Power; as also of the Factories erected for Trade in the Moluccos, Banda, Sumatra, Ceylon, and the two Javas; where she kept Garrisons, in order to convert the Friendship into Sovereignty.

King Philip, whose great Soul ever entertain’d both Forbearance, and King Philip’s mighty Fleet. Counsel, resolv’d to cut off the Heads of this Hydra at the Neck they all sprung from. He gather’d, for the Conquest of England, the mightiest Fleet that has been seen on the Ocean in our Days. Twenty Thousand fighting Men were put aboard tall Ships, besides 9000 Sailors, with 1730 Pieces of Cannon, Abundance of Ammunition, and Pikes and Fire-Arms for the Catholicks, who it was hop’d, as soon as they saw the Spanish Colours, would joyn our Army. Don Alonso Perez de Guzman, Duke of And Army against England. Medina Sidonia commanded in Chief, and was to joyn the Prince of Parma, then Governour of Flanders, who had Commission to raise another Army of 30000 Horse and Foot, with the Necessary Provisions and Ammunition, which he was to transport at a fit Season to that Point of England, where the Thames falls into the Sea, to march thence to London, and there Arm the Catholicks. But it was first requisite to beat the English at Sea, where they were then powerful, and well acquainted with the proper Times to sail and keep at Home. At the least they were to be terrify’d, that they might not dare to obstruct the Passage of the Troops, the Prince of Parma had in readiness at Dunkirk and Newport, or hinder their embarking, when the Spanish Fleet should come thither to waft them over. This Fleet sail’d from Lisbon on the 19th of May, 1588, and as soon as out They suffer by Storms. suffer’d much by the Weather, so that three Gallies were cast away, on the Coast of Bayonne. Abundance of the powder blew up; and the General was oblig’d to return to Corunna, to refit; whence he could not get out till the 2d of July.

Being come into 48 Degrees of Latitude, he sent away Don Lewis de Guzman to give Advice to the Prince of Parma, and on the last of the same Arrive at the Lizard. Month arriv’d himself at the Lizard, in Cornwall, where he lay by, and was certainly inform’d, that all the Enemy’s Ships, being fifty in number, lay in Plymouth. The English Admiral at Break of Day discover’d ours, Spanish Shiptaker. and tho’ he wanted neither Strength, nor Experience in Sea Affairs, he resolved to draw off and avoid ingaging, but his Ships being lighter incommoded us in the Rear. In the Catholick Fleet, a great Ship of Guipuscoa [115]blew up, and another of Andaluzia spent her Main-Mast, in which Distress, two English Ships attacking her, and those afterwards seconded by others, in one of which Sir Francis Drake was, they took her. There Don Pedro de Valdes, a Spanish Commander of known Valour, and then Lieutenant General, was made Prisoner, with whom they sent to Plymouth, a great Quantity of Crown Pieces, and fifty Great Guns. About 400 Spaniards were kill’d, and taken. On the 2d and 4th of August, the Lord Howard, and Drake joyn’d their Squadrons, some write they had an hundred Sail, all well Mann’d, and light, with which they infested ours, which were heavy, and encumber’d, particularly the Portuguese Galleon, call’d the S. John, being the greatest in the Fleet, and in it were John Martinez de Recalde, the Count de Paredes, the Marques de la Favara, and other Commanders of Note. However they got to the Isle of Wight, whence the Duke sent away two Messengers to the Prince of Parma, who was then at Brussels, desiring he would furnish him with Powder and Ball, for the Defence of the Fleet, and imbark what Troops he had ready. But he, either prevented by invincible Obstacles, or for other Reasons, which have left that Princes Reputation Disappointment of the Fleet. expos’d to Censures, mov’d so slowly, that what had been so maturely concerted took no Effect. The Enemy boasting, that the Sea and Winds had fought against us, in Vindication, as they said of their Cause, made publick Rejoycings, firing their Cannon; and soon after the Queen put forth a Proclamation to the same Effect, against which a certain English Religious Man writ learnedly, by the Name of Andrew Philopator.

The Dutch who were in Confederacy with Queen Elizabeth, seeing this Success, were encourag’d to aspire to greater Matters, renouncing their Religion, and their Sovereign, attempting to usurp the Treasures of the East, The Dutch aspire. Mines, Spice, Drugs, and Silks, as appears by their bold Voyages, wherein they have endeavour’d to follow the fresh Examples of the English, and the ancient set them by Columbus, Albuquerque, Magellan, Gama, and Cortes, as we shall see hereafter. But, both they and the English, if they try the Justice of their Cause by the Success of that Fleet, must be oblig’d to prefer the Cause of the Gentiles, when God for his Secret Judgments permitted his own chosen People to be over-thrown. Destruction is more glorious than Prosperity; and a religious Soul will rather chuse to be cast down than Victorious, if an angry God is to give it the Victory.

After this Santiago de Vera govern’d the Philippine Islands, and by special Order, arm’d against Ternate, where the English from that Time traded Another Expedition from the Philippines. with all possible Security. All Nations had settled Factories except the Javaneses and Lascarines. Above 2500 Mahometans from Mecca preach’d their Abominations. They fear’d nothing from Portugal, all their Apprehension was from the Spaniards, who were newly ingag’d to seek Revenge. The King of Ternate well knew that Sarmiento and Ronquillo would have taken it, had not Diseases prevented them. When the News of fresh Preparations came to Tydore, it was carry’d over by Spies to Ternate. That King presently call’d together his Subjects, especially the Islanders of Machian and Homer, who came in 40 Carcoas, because their Islands were very populous. The Number had been greater, but that the King of Ternate prepares. King would not suffer more to be fitted out than he demanded, for he could not conceal his Fear that they would rebel, those Parts being full of Christians, [116]and the Taxes he laid on the People intolerable. Santiago de Vera appointed John Morones General, who wanted not for Conduct, nor his Men for Valour, nor the Fleet for Cannon and Ammunition. But whether Natural Ambition, or any other Accident was the Occasion of it, there were such Divisions among them, that they had sufficient Grounds to mistrust the Event, before they left Manila. They set sail with fair Weather, and pass’d the greatest Dangers of the Sea, and when they thought themselves safest, all the Elements seem’d to conspire against the Fleet. They lost the Light, and their Reckning, the Vessels were shatter’d, and the greatest of Spanish Fleet loses a great Galleon. them sunk, and all the Men lost. This was the Galleon S. Hellen, which carry’d the Guns to batter the Fort, and many other Necessaries and Stores. For all this, they insisted upon proceeding, and the King of Bachian assisted them with what Forces he had rais’d, under Colour of clearing the Sea of some Enemies; and being a Christian baptiz’d, lamented his departing from our holy Faith, on Account of Persecution, and promis’d the Restitution of his Soul.

Spanish General refuses the best Advice. The Weather growing calm, when they were in Sight of Ternate, the Carcoas durst not stand them, but fled at the first Discharges, which they can do without receiving any Damage. Therefore the two Kings, and Paul de Lima, advis’d to fall on in several Places. Ferdinand Boto Machado, Captain of a Galleon, was of the same Opinion; but the General suspecting the former, on Account of his Affinity, and the latter for the Friendship he had lately contracted with the King of Tydore, whom he was not well satisfy’d with, would not follow their Advice; alledging, That it was not convenient, by dividing the Forces, to weaken them more than the Storm Besieges the Fort of Ternate. had done. He laid Siege to the Fort, but the Besieged being acquainted with the Condition of our Troops, oppos’d all their Assaults courageously, and scoff’d and laugh’d at the insignificant Batteries. However our Men, whom the Storms had depriv’d of Necessaries for that Work, vented their Spleen upon the Javanese. These valu’d themselves upon sallying out to Skirmish, being distinguishable by their Arms, and manner of drawing up. The Spaniards handled them so roughly, that they did little more during the War. Some Months were spent in Fruitless Attempts, and if they had attack’d the Country, but a Culverine-Shot short of the Fort, at the Bay of Limathao, and march’d thence to attack the Fort behind, as the most understanding desir’d, it had been of good Consequence. But the General Morones, putting all upon Experience without Forecast, was satisfy’d with fronting next the Sea, doing much Harm, which was caus’d by that first, and obstinate manner of attacking; and that gave Way for Succours to go into the Natives, at other landing Places, tho’ thirty Men at a small Distance might have prevented it. This both the Kings maintain’d, whose Valour, which ought to be commended even in Enemies, if our General had pleas’d, might have given Success to this Undertaking. Besides that experience has shown that fifty Spaniards have done as much upon Occasion, as whole Roman Legions well arm’d and disciplin’d.

Morones now perceiving that neither his Arms, nor his Proposals had Sends some Men to the other Fort. any effect upon the Rebels, he resolv’d to pass over some of his Men against the other Fort, which, tho’ seated on a Ground of difficult Access, seem’d to be pregnable, because built in Haste, a League from the former on a steep [117]Hill. On the Land Side of it is the Mountain, and on the Back a Lake, and is of no use, because it does not defend the City, which is open, and is Javanese Ships burnt. only regarded for being near the old Fort. Our Men went on chearfully, and the Defendants receiv’d them as well firing their Cannon, which gave a Check to the Spanish Fury. Those in the other Fort, tho’ they made little use of Fire-Arms, being compell’d by Necessity, ventur’d to sally out to the Shore. To draw them to this Resolution, some of our Men on a sudden set Fire to the Junks, in which a great Number of Javanese Indians had come thither. The Vessels, which were old blaz’d up, without any Obstruction from those who guarded them, but they referr’d the Remedy to their Weapons. They were in all about 3000 fighting Men, 1000 of them had Muskets, whereof 200 were expert at them; the rest neither Pikes, nor Lances, nor any other long sort of Arms, but only those they call Toranas, about a Fathom in Length, like Darts, and some like Arrows, which they cast by main Strength, with Canes and Strings, wherewith they unexpectedly wound unarm’d Men in Fight; because they fly not out of a Bow, but are thrown strait forward, or over their Heads. Others had only their Campilanes, or Cymiters, and Shields. Many of them fought the more obstinately, confiding in their Coats of Mail, and Head-Pieces, bought of the Portugueses; but as soon as they clos’d with our Men, they broke their Order, and lost Courage. This Accident prov’d a very great Obstacle, because it diverted our Men from their double Design of pressing both Forts at the same Time, so that the very Commanders were forc’d to ingage. Morones knew how to behave himself upon all Occasions, and the Spaniards made such a Slaughter, that almost all the Javaneses lay upon Bloody Victory gain’d by the Spaniards. the Spot. Those in the Forts had not the Courage to fall in upon the Rear, tho’ they pour’d a Volley upon the Forces of Tydore and Bachian, but with little Harm. This Victory was not gain’d without Effusion of Blood, yet they took Heart to hope for one more compleat, at the Arrival of the Galeon from India, and believ’d that Addition of Strength would make amends for what they lost in the Storm.

The Galeon arriv’d at Tydore, better provided to carry on the Trade, than the War. For this Reason, and because many of our Men were Sick, or Wounded, Morones was oblig’d to raise the Siege, and dismiss those Kings, The Siege rais’d. to whom he afterwards sent Presents of Spanish Commodities, some Horses and Silks. It was since known that tho’ the Ternates will endure much Hardship, they were then so near press’d, that Hunger must have subdu’d them, could our Men have stay’d a little longer. They embark’d in Sight of the Enemy, who presently appear’d in the Field rejoycing, with Musick, and other Tokens of Victory. The Asiatick Traders resorted to their Ports, and others from Europe, but particularly their new Friends the English, with whom they communicated the Joy of their Success.

They never made a good use of Peace and Quietness at Ternate, as soon as Notable Practices. that was now restor’d, the King was again at Variance with his Unkles; which Fortune so improv’d as to furnish an Opportunity that might have been advantageous to our Designs, had not she thwarted it. Cachil Mandraxa was the noblest of Sultan Aerio’s Sons, as born of the Queen they call Putriz, which is the Chief. His Father would have had him succeed in the Throne, but was disgusted at a Boldness which does not use to be mislik’d [118]among Politicians. Cachil Mandraxa was desperately in love with Filola, his Niece, Daughter to the King his Brother; and that Princes did not refuse her Unkles Courtship. The Father one Day found them talking together, in the Apartment reserv’d only for himself; and tho’ he was satisfied their Conversation was within the Bounds of Decency, took such an Aversion, that he depriv’d him of the Succession. The illegitimate Nephew Reign’d, against the Will of all the Unkles, who were near conspiring Subtilty of the King of Ternate. to kill him; but the subtle King knew how to disappoint their Designs, and secure himself without discovering the Contrivance. He call’d Cachil Mandraxa to him, and repeating all past Distates, told him, how desirous he was to remove all manner of Jealousies by a perfect Reconciliation, which he thought might be done by means of the Princess Filola, and since there was such a good Correspondence between them, all the Rest would be easie. However before he gave her to him to Wife, he must reflect that she was promis’d to the King of Tydore, to whom he was not willing to administer fresh Causes of War, or to be the Occasion of interrupting that short Tranquility they enjoy’d. That since all they discours’d there would remain in their Breasts, he would have him to take his Advice. Mandraxa was beside himself, with that unexpected Satisfaction, and yet had he been truly Master of himself, he might easily have seen thro’ the Fraud of that pleasing His crafty Words. Change in his Condition, wherein he found the King so much his Friend, who but just before had been his Enemy. He thank’d him for the Favour, and putting his whole Dependance on the Words of his Mouth, desir’d he would give him the Advice he spoke of. The King answer’d, I have contriv’d a Way, which will satisfie you, and the King of Tydore will have no Cause to complain. For the attaining of both these Ends, I will keep Council, as is requisite, and do you any Night steal away the Princess, the Way you shall best like, so it be with Regard to my Reputation, and in all Respects giving such outward Tokens, that all Men may believe it was open Violence, and no Contrivance, or at least known to me, I, on my Side, will pretend to be very Angry, and will complain of the Injury as loudly as is requisite to satisfie the World of my Innocence. For why should I, Unkle, wish for the Felicities of this World, but to make them common to our Family? I will retain the Cares of the Crown, and do you enjoy the Satisfaction the Kingdom affords. Mandraxa could not forbear Weeping for Joy, he fell down at his Nephew’s Feet and kiss’d them, without disguizing any thing of his Passion, yet suppressing the Joy of his new Hopes, the best he could, he found Means to acquaint the Princess, and to appoint the Hour, Place, and Confidents for exposing herself to be stolen away.

To this Purpose they pitch’d upon a Garden, which looks out upon the Sea, adorn’d with its Natural Trees, whence the Ships are seen, and among them, on the Day prefix’d they spy’d a Carcoa, with all the Men that Row’d curiously dress’d and they and the Soldiers wearing Garlands, plainly show’d the Design of their Voyage, tho’ they row’d without the Musick they use to have at other Times. Mandraxa and a small but brave Number of his Friends landed as silently, and they after the manner of Talasio, and the Cachal Mandraxa steals the Princess Filola. ancient Romans, when they forc’d away the Sabine Women, laid Hold of Filola and the Rest, and run them aboard with all possible Speed, conveying them to a strong Place in the Island, where having fortify’d himself, [119]like a Soldier, Mandraxa devote himself to Love. Fame the utter Enemy to Secrecy divulg’d the Fact, and convey’d it over to the King of Tydore’s Ears, with the King of Ternate’s Complaints. He magnify’d the Affront, and every Man spoke of it, according to his own Notion. The King who had contriv’d it, and by whose Breath all the Machines of that Tragedy were mov’d assembled the prime Men of his Kingdom, most of them Enemies to the deluded Mandraxa, and ask’d their Assistance and Advice in so notorious a Base falsehood of the King. Violence, and pretending extraordinary Concern. They all Voted to a Man, that it was absolutely necessary to make such an Example as might deter others from the like. When the Consultation was over, the King dispatch’d Messengers to his Unkle, intreating him to repair to Court to stop ill Mouths by fair Means, and appease the Neighbouring Princes. Cachil Mandraxa made no difficulty to obey, as well knowing that none of his Actions had been contrary to the King’s Orders. Only the Princess advis’d the Contrary; for tho’ young, as little above 20 years of Age, she was better acquainted with her Brother, and well knew he never kept his Faith, particularly with his own Family, and that he could not have any Kindness for them as being jealous of the Crown. Mandraxa made no Account of all that, but went to Court, and enter’d the Palace attended by his Family, and relying on the King’s Promise, but more especially on the secret Mystery of that Affair, known only to them two, Unkle and Nephew. When he came to kiss the King’s Hand, he looking as stern as if he had not advis’d the stealing of the Princess, said he knew not what Course to take upon so notorious an Affront offer’d to his Crown and Palace, but to cut off his Head. Mandraxa thinking at first that had been all Counterfeit, and according to what had been agreed between them, when he perceiv’d He murders Mandraxa. it was barefac’d falsehood, would have spoke loud in Defence of his Innocence; but was not permitted, and the King making a Sign to a Sturdy Black he had prepar’d for that Action, he drew his Cymiter, and hew’d him down barbarously. The poor Prince fell, without being reliev’d by any Man; for at that Time his Brothers Cachil Tulo, and Cachil Sufur were not at Ternate, the former being Governor, the latter Admiral. Nor did they come to Ternate in a long Time after, tho’ they look Care to protect the Widow Princess, who was left with Child, and afterwards brought forth Cachil Amida, who dy’d Young.

The whole Truth of this Matter was soon known, with all its Particulars, and Circumstances; and the Cachiles conferring together, Tulo resolv’d to go over to the Service of King Philip, to which Purpose, when The King’s Unkles conspire against him. Duarte Pereyra was Commander in Chief at Tydore, he went thither to treat with him, and with Antony de Matos, who went first for the same End to Bachian; but forasmuch as what was concerted among them, will better appear by the Letter Cachil Tulo sent from Tydore to the Governour Santiago de Vera, we will here insert it, translated From the Malaye Language, by the King’s Naguatatos, so they there call the Interpreters.

Cachil Tulo’s letter to the Governor of the Philipines. Cachil Babu, my Brother, late King of Ternate, writ to the King of Portugal, to desire he would do him Justice, upon a Man, who murder’d his Father and mine; upon receiving which Satisfaction, he would again deliver the Fort of Ternate to his Majesty, it being then out of his Possession, [120]His present Majesty succeeding in the Throne of Portugal, answer’d my Brother’s Letter, by Cachil Naique, his Embassador; but when he return’d my Brother was dead, which was the Reason we did not then deliver up the Fort, because a Bastard Son had succeeded him, being proclaim’d King by the People of Ternate, with the Assistance of the King of Tydore, tho’ he had no Right to it. He would not perform what his Father had promis’d, and he was oblig’d to; nor follow the Advice given him by me, and by my Brother Cachil Mandraxa, the rightful Heir of the Crown; which was that he should deliver up the Fort, as his Father had promis’d, to the Portuguese; and this, not because he could not defend himself against them, and his Majesty; but expresly because his Father, and my Brother had so order’d; for we did not suppose it could be taken from us by Force of Arms; but we knew it was his Will to serve his Majesty, by delivering up the Fort to him. He finding we persisted in this Opinion, resolv’d to murder my Brother, and his own Unkle, the true Heir of the Crown, cutting him in Pieces, by the Hands of a Slave, when he came upon his Word, and had his Security and mine. Wherefore considering the Injustice of my Nephew upon this Occasion, and that he will not perform what his Father, my Brother and I promised to his Majesty, I am resolv’d from this Time forward, to become his Majesty’s sincere Subject and Servant. And I do by these Presents, oblige my self, and swear by my Law, at I did swear; and do not depart from it, to the Father Vicar Antony Ferreyra, to give all my Help and Assistance, towards the taking of the Fort, with all my Kindred and Friends, till it shall be in the Possession of his Majesty’s Commander, or whosoever shall come with the Portugueses, or Spaniards that attend him; upon Condition, that the Commander, or Commanders, shall, in his Majesty’s Name, perform what Duarte Pereyra, the Commander in chief promis’d me and sign’d for him, I having given him a Counterpart; which is, that I shall be proclaim’d King of Ternate, as soon as Possession is taken of the Fort for his Majesty; both in regard it belongs to me in Right of my Father, and of the Service I now do, and hereafter hope to do his Majesty. I therefore beg it as a Favour of your Lordship, and require you in his Majesty’s Name, that you take Care to send the greatest Number of Men you possibly can, and with the greatest Expedition; to the End that this my Intention, and Will to serve his Majesty herein may be effectual, which I hope will be without the Expence of Lives; notwithstanding the Fort is well fortify’d, as your Lordship may have been inform’d. The Commander in chief, will write to your Lordship, what Season and Order those Forces are to observe. Given at Tydore, to which Place I am come to this Intent, as will be testify’d by the Father Vicar Antony Ferreyra, and the Judge Antony de Matos, whom, as Persons of such Note, I desir’d to sign for me. May the 23d.

Nunno Pereyra’s Perswasions to the same Governor. At the Bottom of the Letter, the Vicar and Matos certify’d his Hand and Subscription. With this came another very long one, wherein Duarte Pereyra gives the Governour a more ample Account of what is here deliver’d briefly, representing to him the Opportunity offer’d in forcible Terms. He tells him that Mandraxa a little before his Death, had propos’d the same thing to him, that his Brother Tulo now did; and that they were desirous to fulfill what they promis’d Nunno Pereyra. That the [121]Island of Machian, the most fruitful in Clove, Espous’d the Party that was against the King. That they could no longer endure their Oppression. He perswaded him to Arm 400 Spaniards, if they were come from Mexico, and to Ship them off for the Expedition upon Ternate, giving out, that they were going to clear those Seas from Javaneses, whose Friendship the People of Ternate value more than they do ours. That besides the good Success he expected by the Help of those Forces, they would at least secure those Ports against the English, the People of Ternate having always a Fleet in Readiness. That the Enterprize might succeed with Fifteen Frigates, and one Galeon, provided they went to stay a Year at the Moluccos, and brought a Number of Philippine Pioneers. He says, the Javanese Ships are less than the Frigats, and there are Forty Soldiers in each of them, who lye Aboard Eight Months, and live a Year upon 300 Bushels of Rice. That in Case the Frigates could not hold the Men, they should bring some Junks, which are necessary Vessels to Transport Provisions from the Islands of Burro and Bachian. He complains of the King of Tydore’s ill Behaviour, and his Avarice; of Sancho de Vasconcelos, and James de Azambuja, who built the Fort of Tydore in an ill place. He commends the King of Bachian, and says he in private lives like a Christian. Among these Things he intermixes many more, all of them tending to perswade the Expedition of Ternate, to blot out the last Disgrace, without any Expence to the King, through Cachil Tulo’s Contrivance.

The Governour receiv’d this Dispatch, and he would willingly have put it in Execution immediately; but as it went on slowly, and the Death The Projects for executing the Design. of Cachil Tulo happened in the mean while, it was requisite to delay the Design, and attend to the Preservation of the Philippine Islands, against the Machinations of the Chineses and Japoneses, against whose Robberies and Burnings they are never secure. Each of these Attempts harass’d the Province with the Expence of Treasure, and Power, so that there was a necessity of breathing to recover both. It was thought the most proper Advice to joyn from the Philippines and Malaca, with equal Force, coming from both Parts to Arm in the Moluccos, which was the Boundary of both Provinces. This took Effect some Years after, Captain Andrew Furtado coming from Malaca, of whose Actions it will be proper to begin to speak to give a Reputation to his Person.

Andrew Furtado de Mendoza might have Ennobled his Family, had it Andrew Furtado his Actions. not been of antient Quality. He was the Terror of those Eastern Parts, where he serv’d the King ever since the Year 1576, subduing Barbarous Nations. In the Year 1587 he was the Governour of the Fort of Rachol, till he came to have that of Malaca. Whilst he was in the first, some Villages of Gentiles rose up against the Ministers of the Church, disturbing Christianity with Warlike Disorders. Furtado pacify’d them with Severity, and his Authority. In 1591 Furtado was Commander of the Portuguese Soldiery in that Archipelago, and was very earnest to employ them in the Recovery of Ternate; but was hinder’d by other Wars, which he concluded Victoriously. In August that same Year, he was inform’d that Eighteen Galeons had put out of Cunnal, Commanded by Cutumaza, assisted by Raju, with a Design to Besiege the Fort of Ceylon. This Cutumaza had the Year before Burnt a Ship of ours, Sailing for China, and made [122]dismal Havock on the Coast of Coromandel. Furtado went out in Search of the Enemies Fleet, and by the way reliev’d the Fort of Ceylon; and on the Coast of Malabar he met three Ships Bound from Mecca for Cunnal. He fought them, and Sunk two, the Sea running so high, that the Vessels which Row’d could not attack them. The other after a long Dispute yielded to him. This Victory was a sufficient Revenge for the Burning of our Ships. Continual War is maintain’d in these Parts, which Neighbour upon Malaca; and that in Ceylon never ceases, contrary to the Advice of Persons that are well acquainted with India; because the best Product of that Island being the Cinnamon, a Commodity of less Durance than the Mace, Clove and Pepper, they look upon almost all the expence laid upon Ceylon, as good as thrown away. Besides that the greatest Commanders are employ’d in suppressing the continual Rebellions of those most inconstant People, without stretching out, at least as far as the Moluccos, by their Absence encouraging their Tyranny, and giving Opportunity to Nations that are our Enemies to fix themselves in our Forts.

Ceylon describ’d. Ceylon is one of the most Remarkable Islands In the World, and the most fruitful. It lies opposite to Cape Comorin, Nobly Inhabited, and cultivated. In it grow all Plants, known in all other Parts of the World, Nutmegs, Pepper, Cinnamon, and the most Excellent call’d Mosyllion grows in this Island. Here is Wild and Garden Fruit, Spanish Figs, and Grapes, and the best Oranges in all Asia. There are whole Woods of mighty Palm-Trees. The Variety of Flowers, would take up much Time to describe it; as also of Grain known to us, Wheat, Rice, and Flax, of which and their Cotton, they make wonderful Webs. It has all sorts of Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, Steel, Tin, Iron, and Seed Pearl. Several Product. Christaline Rivers, and Fountains moisten it, with delightful and Medicinal Waters, of Excellent Qualities. And among the rest there are Springs of Liquid Bitumen, thicker than our Oyl, and some of pure Balsam. There are Burning Mountains continually blazing, and casting out Clods of Brimstone among the Crags of the Hills; where there are Groves Birds. of Tall Trees, on whose Branches are to be seen all sorts of Birds that fly in other Parts of the World, and among them our Turkys, Wild Hens, Beasts. and Pidgeons. It abounds in Deer, Wild-Boars, Tygers, Lions, and Elephants. Elephants of so Noble a Kind, that all others submit to them. Those that are bred in this Island have such an Extraordinary Natural Instinct, that it verifies what Aristotle, Plutarch, Athenæus, Ælian, Pliny, and others, who have Writ Natural History testifie, and is, that whether it proceeds from Knowledge, or Habit, they partake of the Wit, Sense, and even of the Prudence of Men. We are told they have so much Sense of Honour, that they will not go Aboard a Ship, if they imagine they are carry’d to serve Princes in strange Countries, and that they obey, if their Owners swear they will bring them back to their own. That they are concern’d at abusive Words given them. That they pay a sort of Religious Respect to the Sun and Moon. That they remember such Things as they conceive; and Gellius perswades us we may believe, that at Night they bewail their Servitude with doleful Complaints; and if any Man happens to come near in the Height of their Lamentation, they with shame suppress their Sighs; [123]and in short, they seem feasible of the Iniquity of their Fate. In this Country it is their Part to load and unload Ships, the Weight of Commerce, whether Arms, Metals, Provisions, or other Commodities whatsoever hanging on their Teeth, or lying on their Necks. They are more willing to carry Arm’d Men on their Backs, in great Castles built to that purpose. They serve the Chingalas, not as they did in Rome at publick Shows, but in Battel, as they did the Carthaginians, and afterwards the Romans. The People of Ceylon believe their Country is the Terrestrial Opinion that Paradise is in Ceylon. Paradise. They call the Top of a certain Mountain Adam’s Point, and on it, they say, is to be seen the Print of his Foot, and that there he did Pennance. Upon this Belief, the Jogues, who are penitent Pilgrims, visit that Point, where they affirm there grows a thick Tree, of an indifferent Strange Tree. Height, with small rough Leaves, of a dusty Colour, the Bark Ash-colour’d, which in the Night shines, and dispells Darkness. Under Colour of this Superstition, all the Gangs of strowling Players or Actors, come Players. out of this Island, and travel throughout all India, representing their Fables, with odd Gestures, and Dancing to little Flat Tabors, Bag-pipes, and Rattles of small Bells. Abundance of Pearls are found about it. The Gold and other Metals are kept untouch’d in the Mines, by publick Law, and yet notwithstanding this Precaution, they are not free from War and Oppression. The Natives are call’d Chingalas, and resemble the Malabars in Customs and Countenances. They have broad Noses, but are not so black, and go naked, but not to immodesty. Formerly they had but one King, who was dispossess’d by Force, and Treachery, and the Kingdom King’s expell’d. divided among many. Division having thus weaken’d them, a Barbarian, call’d Raju, tyrannically expell’d the King’s the Island; one of whom was by the Magnificence of the Kings of Portugal bred at Goa.

Raju was a subtle Soldier, and jealous even of those that supported him. He had some Years before, besieg’d the Fort of Columbo, with a great Body of Foot, Elephants and Horse. Andrew Furtado being in search of the Enemies Fleet, in Prosecution of his Revenge for the Ships lost, to relieve Furtado relieves Columbo. the Fort of Columbo, doubled Cape Comorin, thro’ the Streight of Ceylon, at the Time when it is usually most difficult and dangerous for Tall Ships, much more for such Vessels as use Oars. He came to the Fort so opportunely, that had he stay’d never so little longer it had been lost, for most of the Garrison had mutiny’d against their Commander in Chief Simon de Brito who was wounded by them with two Musket Balls. Raju was marching with all Expedition by Land to Columbo for fear of slipping the Opportunity offer’d him of taking Possession of it. Cutumuza lay with all his Fleet in the River Cordiva, distant from the Fort ready to attack it by Sea, when Raju fell on by Land. Furtado was before-hand with him, and getting in, dispos’d all Things for its Defence. He quell’d the Mutiny, punish’d the Ring-leaders, satisfy’d such as had just Cause of Complaint or had been wrong’d, and with all possible Speed went out to find Cunale’s Fleet. Nor was he disappointed, for the Enemy did not offer Beat, the Indian Fleet. to fly, but met him, with his Ships drawn up in good Order, and after Cannonading, they laid one another aboard, where there was an obstinate Fight on both Sides, till Cunnale’s Navy was defeated. Furtado took 14 Galeons, with all their Artillery, and Men, besides Abundance kill’d. The Admiral [124]fled with only four Ships of 18 he had, and made to Raju’s Country. This Victory was sufficient Satisfaction for the Damage receiv’d by that rebellious Fleet, the ill Success whereof discourag’d Raju from coming to besiege Columbo, so that he retir’d and dismiss’d his Army.

Not long after, Furtado was inform’d by his Spyes, that the King of Jasanapatan had concluded a League with Raju, pressing him to return to the Siege of Columbo, whilst he did the same to Mana. That his Presumption might not want such Punishment, as became the Honour of the Crown of Portugal, and the Reputation of its Grandeur, which is more prevalent in those Parts than Force, Furtado gathering what Power he could, with all possible Celerity attack’d that King. He was not unprovided, but drawing Routs him, and subdues his Kingdom. up without the Walls of that City, offer’d him Battel, his Men, Elephants and Horses covering spacious Fields. Furtado playing both Parts of a Commander, and a Soldier, drew up his Forces, encourag’d them in few Words; and both Sides coming to the Charge exercis’d their Force and Fury; but at Length the King’s Troops were routed, and he slain entering the City, in which abundance of Brass Cannon was found, besides the Plunder, which was considerable. He took Possession of it, and seizing the Forts and Garrisons, carry’d on the War there in such Manner, that the whole Kingdom seeing such severe Execution, and feeling it so heavily within its Bowels, submitted to the King of Spain. By his Authority, when the Sword was put up, he appointed a Kinsman of the late King, to whom of Right it belonged, to reign in Jasanapatan, he having been taken in the last Battel. He caus’d him to swear and plight his Faith, that he would be a perpetual Vassal to his Majesty; imposing on him the Payment of a yearly Tribute, which still subsists. The Writings containing this Settlement were sent by him into Spain, where and at Goa, all that had been done was approv’d of by the Viceroy, and the Conqueror, who had concluded it so happily, highly applauded.

Ternate the Cause of Rebellions. He next Strengthned the Fort of Columbo, with Four Ships of his Fleet, and 100 Soldiers; and Supply’d Cosme de la Feta with Eighty Men, under Two Captains, to prosecute the Affair of Candia, which was committed to him, and sorted good effect. No Rebellion broke out in those Parts, but what was either supported by Ternate, or proceeded from its Example, and great Celerity was requisite in the Commanders for suppressing of it.

Coast of Pearl Fishery Rebells, and is reduc’d. At this same Time all the Coast of the Pearl Fishery rebell’d, and among other sudden Destruction usually made by Seditious Men in Arms, the Subjects of Vinapanaique burnt Twenty five Christian Churches. Furtado made all possible speed to chastize them before the Rebellion grew to a Head. The Mutineers not being well Strengthned, sent Embassadors to him, begging Peace, and colouring their Guilt with Excuses, which Furtado admitted of because it was convenient for his Majesties Service; upon Condition they should make good all the Damages occasion’d by their Revolt. He commanded them to rebuild the Churches they had destroy’d, and to grant the Society of the Jesuits, who had then the Charge of the Christians in that Country, all the Liberties and Immunities demanded by those then residing there; taking sufficient Hostages for the Performance. [125]

Furtado ill us’d would depart India. These and other no less notable Actions, he perform’d in the space of four Months; but as Envy seldom fails to oppose Valour, when he came to Cochin, and was there ready to set out for the Conquest of the Moluccos, and particularly of Ternate, he received Letters from the Viceroy, Matthias de Albuquerque commanding him to deliver up the Fleet to Nunno Vello Pereyra. He obey’d, and when he came to Goa, was Imprisoned, and put to Trouble. As soon as it was in his Power, he resolv’d to depart India, and remove himself from the ill-will of those he thought were not his Friends; but the City of Goa conjur’d him not to forsake it, and in vain endeavour’d to procure a Reconciliation betwixt those Commanders. This happened in the Year 1592, when, and some Years after, Ternate might have been reliev’d, as Furtado desir’d, had not the Animosities reigning obstructed it. However they were so far from employing him, that, tho’ Furtado several times Offer’d himself, with his own Ships, and at his proper Cost, where there was such Necessity of suppressing Cunnale, yet he was as often Rejected, and that Victory envy’d him, which afterwards he had granted by Heaven, as we shall see in its Place.

At this Time Santiago de Vera was discharged of his Command of the Philippine Islands. He had signified his Intentions to Andrew Furtado, and received his Answer, That he would comply with his Desires; but Fortune disappointed these good Beginnings, embroiling Furtado with those who did not love him, and removing Santiago from his Government. His Successor was Gomez Perez de las Marinnas, Knight of the Order of Santiago, Gomez Perez Governor of the Philippines. or St. James the Apostle, a Person of high Reputation, born at Betanzos, in the Kingdom of Galicia. He arriv’d at the Philippines in the Year 1590, and brought with him his Son Don Lewis, Knight of the Order of Alcantara. The new Governor found Manila open, without any Form of a City, and without Wealth to Improve it. Above 200000 Pieces of Eight were wanting for this Purpose; yet he compass’d the Work by Projects, and Contrivance without any Dammage to the Publick, or to private Persons. He Monopoliz’d the Cards; he laid Penalties on excessive Gaming, and punish’d such as Forestal’d the Markets, and on Victuallers, and other Retailers of that Sort that were guilty of Frauds; with these Fines he built the Walls of Manila, which are 12849 Geometrical Foot in Compass, He Walls Manila; Builds Forts, &c. each Foot being the third part of a Yard. He apply’d himself diligently to this Work, and the Inhabitants attended it, being willing to forward it on Account of the Intreaties and Example of their Chief. The City had but one Fort, and that ill built, wherefore he Erected another at the Mouth of the River, calling it Santiago, and enclosed the old one. He finish’d the Cathedral, and built from the Ground the Church of St. Potenciana, Patroness of the Island, for Women that have retir’d from the World. Then he apply’d himself to casting, and brought able Artists, who furnish’d the Place with heavy and small Cannon; built Galleys to Cruize and Trade, whereon depends the Welfare of those Countries; and pursuant to what he had promis’d in Spain, bent his Thoughts towards Ternate, and all the Moluccos; reflected on the Disreputation of the unfortunate Expeditions of his Predecessors, who attempted the Conquest of that flourishing Kingdom, and how he might punish those who Tyranniz’d in it.

He imparted his Thoughts by Word of Mouth, and by Letters to Zealous [126]His first Steps for recovery of the Moluccos. Persons, and more particularly to F. Marta, a Priest of the Society of Jesus, and a grave and active Man, whose Experience and Doctrine had been very Advantageous in those Parts. This Religious Man furnish’d him with Intelligence, Advice, and proper Ministers to prepare and carry on the Work; one of whom was Brother Gaspar Gomez, a Spaniard, and Lay-Brother of the said Society. Among the many Conferences there were to this Effect, I find an Exhortation of F. Antony Marta, in a Letter he writ to the Governor from Tydore, which, because it is an Original, and conducing for the better Understanding of this Affair, I will here insert, translated out of the Portuguese. Grant me this Liberty, since the Speeches which are generally Fabulous, pretended to be made by Generals and Consuls, in the Greek and Latin Histories, are allow’d of. F. Antony Marta says thus;

F. Merta’s Letter, of the State of the Moluccos. In fine, your Lordship is resolv’d to undertake this Expedition. You will have a spacious Field for dilating the Glory of God very much, and rendering your Name famous to Perpetuity. By it your Lordship will acquire to his Majesty a most Large and Wealthy Kingdom, since all this Archipelago of the Moluccos and Amboina, as far as Banda, which is above 130 Leagues in Length and 70 in Breadth, is an inexhaustible Source of Clove, Nutmeg, and Mace, which will afford his Majesty a Yearly Income of 200000 Crusados, which is about 27000 Pounds Sterling, then a considerable sum, in India alone; besides that of other Islands, which produce no Clove. Nor will it require any Expence, because the Country it self will freely afford it on its very Mountains; and what is yet much more, your Lordship will gain above 200000 Souls to God, all which, in a short time, after subduing the Kingdom, will become Christians, without any, or with very little Opposition; whereby your Lordship will have a burning Flambeau in this World, to light and conduct you to Heaven. Besides, you will magnify and perpetuate your Name, with a Title nothing inferior to those of the ancient Roman Generals, such as those of Germanicus, Africanus, and the like. It is not now requisite to touch upon the Method your Lordship is to observe for compassing this Enterprize, to your eternal Praise; for, as we understand, there is no want of Experience with you for Warlike Affairs; Yet if your Lordship should be any way Dubious, Jerome de Azevedo is able to inform you of such things as you shall desire to know. He is well acquainted with the Strength of the Moluccos, and of their Enemies. However I would have your Lordship look League of the Mahometans. upon this War as considerable and difficult, because it is very convenient to come well Provided, and Resolv’d. You are not to Fight with the Ternates alone, but with all the Moors of this Archipelago. Hitherto the Fort of Amboina had to do with the Ternates, that are at Veranula, and this of Tydore with those in the Island Ternate; but now of late we are to fight with those of the Islands of Banda and of Seram. All the Moors in those Parts Assembled last year, and Resolv’d, That for the future the War should be carry’d on under the Name of their Religion. And for the more Security, and better Establishing of this Point, they chose those of Banda for Chiefs of their Law; and took an Oath to lay down their Lives, or expell the Portugueses. Accordingly the last Year, those of Banda came with the Ternates Fort of Amboyna Beseig’d. of Veranula, with a great number of Carcoas, to Beseige the Fort of Amboyna; and in the Engagement they had with us, took one of the two Galiots we brought from Goa, tho’ it was not their Valour, but our Negligence [127]that occasion’d the making of that Prize. It plainly appear’d, that our Lord did it to punish our Pride. This so far Encouraged them, that they durst afterwards daily Cruize in sight of the Fort, took the Fishermen that went out in the Morning to follow their Trade, and laid a Ground some Carcoas on the Shore. They erected a Mosque opposite to the Fort, as in a safe Place, and thus they kept the Fort Besieged with Contempt, for the space of a Month. At the end thereof, the Galley going out, with one Galiot we had left, made them fly, every one to his own Country, giving out, and threatning, That they would Return next Year with a greater Fleet, which will be about September. We are certainly assured that the People of Banda, left 50 of their prime Men at Amboyna, as Hostages for the performance of their Engagement. This is also known by a Man of our own, who fled from Banda, having been carry’d thither Prisoner from Amboyna. We are informed, that 25 Carcoas would set out, so many being Launch’d, and they were to Sail after their Lent, which is at the End of this Month of July, and to joyn the Seyrves, and the rest of the Confederates, in order to return again before the Fort of Amboyna. If they come with such a Force, I am very suspitious that the Fort will be lost; because the Enemies method is to take in all the Towns that are Subject to it; and when this is left alone, wanting the Support of its Neighbours, it must of necessity Surrender. Antony Perez, the Governor of that Fort, is a Man of Courage, and well Fortified; and yet there are Circumstances to be consider’d, some of them very Difficult; as that the Enemies are Numerous, and there will come some Confederates with them, who are fit for any piece of Treachery; besides, that they cannot be Reliev’d from any Part whatsoever, for the full space of five Months, that is till the beginning of January next. We cannot but apprehend some great Mischief will happen; for supposing they do not take the Fort, still this War is Dangerous, as being Universal, with all the Moors; stirr’d up by means of the Caciques; Concerted under solemn Oaths; and Declar’d to be Religious, with full Remission of Sins to all that Die in it. There is no want of Fomenters, and those Caciques of Note, and General Conspiracy against Christians. great Authority among the Moors, in Banda, Amboyna, Ternate, and Tydore. These Men urge their Religion, and the Honour of Mahomet, and by that means manage the People as they please; as I have found by Experience this Year, and in this War we had at Amboyna, in which I was. For formerly the Moors were soon weary of being at Sea, and when any Man of Note happened to be kill’d in Fight, they presently retir’d, looking upon it as an ill Omen. Now they continue all the seasonable Months at sea, without flinching; tho’ the Portugueses slew 150 of their Men, and among them their Admiral, and others of the prime Commanders they had in their Fleet. To this must be added, That this is a general Conspiracy of all the Moors against us; insomuch, that two who were our Friends, and had Assisted us several times, with their Fleets, against the Ternates, being those of the Island Burro, these being summoned by the Commander to Sail with him in the Navy, as they had done at other times, did not only refuse it now, but would not so much as receive the Message, or suffer him that carry’d it to Land. The Tydores did the same, for the Commander of Amboyna demanding Assistance of them, they would not go, alledging that their Fort was in as much Danger. And the King of Tydore being inform’d of your Lordships coming, [128]his Subjects declare before hand, and perhaps at the Instigation of their King, That they will have no Spaniards in these Parts; which makes us look about, where they will raise Moors to Destroy us. Therefore all Delays, in this Affair, will be very dangerous; because we are Inferior to the Moors, and must of Necessity Fight them, since it is for Religion, and Honour, on both which Accounts they are become our mortal Enemies. By this your F. Marta presses for Relief. Lordship will understand what need we are in of your Succour and Relief; and may compute how many are to draw their Swords against you, since they are all our Enemies in general, and have Conspir’d against us. However, it will be Discretion first to Dissemble with the Tydores, that they may not joyn the Ternates, and by that means render the War more tedious and difficult. I do not speak to all the rest in particular, according to my Notion, because I refer it to Jerome de Azevedo, who will give a very good Account. But let this be Established as a Maxim, That your Lordship has a mighty Enterprize in Hand; and I trust in God he will give you Wisdom, and Strength to go through it with Ease; since you come to Revenge the Injuries formerly, and now offered by these Barbarians, to God and his Irreverences to Religion. Saints. For we know that the Ternates still drink out of the consecrated Chalices, and make use of the Patens to Offer, or Receive any thing, as on profane Salvers; and of the Vestments, and Ornaments of Altars, they make Cloaths, and Hangings for their Houses. The People of Banda, most of them, wear Ornaments of the Blood of above 3000 Christians, they Treacherously Murder’d, at several times, in their Ports, as they went thither to Trade with them; and in that Island, and part of the Sea, there are Streams of Spanish and Portuguese Blood running. Your Lordship came to spread the Catholick Faith, and that you may the better conceive what Jerome de Azevedo will say to you touching this Affair, I send you by him a Draught of all this Archipelago, as well of the Moluccos, as of Amboyna, and Banda. In it your Lordship will see what a large Kingdom we loose, when it might be recover’d with little Cost. It only remains, That your Lordship come, with all possible Expedition, because the greatest Danger is in Delay; and when you are here you will find brave Commanders, who will assist you with their Good Officers and Soldiers. Swords and their Advice. Among them is Sancho de Vasoncelos, who was Commander at Amboyna, has often fought with these Infidels, and obtain’d signal Victories over them. Here is also Thomas de Sousa, Commander of Molucco, and of most Southern Parts, a Man expert in Martial Affairs. In Tydore and Amboyna, you will also find brave Soldiers, and there will not want to Pay them, for the Riches of the Country will be sufficent for that, and to satisfy them with Gold, precious Stones, and other Booty; besides you will find many sorts of Arms. We Religious Men daily offer up our Prayers, Gomez Perez prepares. and will so continue to do with Fervour; and tho’ the Unworthiness of the Ministers might be a Hinderance, yet we hope they will prove Advantageous.

The Governour receiv’d this Letter; which, with the Discourse he had more at large with Jerome de Azevedo, made him put the last Hand to a Work of so much Importance to the Service of the Christian Commonwealth, which had been neglected in those Parts. Gaspar Gomez had conferr’d with him long before, and by his Means, and the Accounts of other knowing Persons, the Governor was so well acquainted with the Kingdoms, and Seas, the Seasons and Dangers of the Undertaking, that he had no great need of F. [129]Marta’s Map. He dispatch’d Gaspar Gomez, a Man of Secrecy and Activity, trusting him with the Design, because he was recommended by several grave Fathers of that Order. He gave him particular Instructions, with which, Gaspar Gomez sent as a Spy. and his own Experience, he wander’d about the Archipelago, and learnt as much as was convenient. He visited Ternate, Tydore, Mindanao, both the Javas, and scarce omitted any Place, as far as the Point of Malaca, but what he took a View of.

In the Year 1593, King Philip the 2d bestow’d the Government of Cartagena, in America, upon Don Pedro Bravo de Acunna. To take this Employ, D. Pedro de Acuna Governor of Cartagena. he quitted that he had in the Spanish Galleys; he was Captain of the Admiral Galley, and Vice-Admiral of them all, under the Adelantado, or Lord Lieutenant of Castile, his Kinsman. He had serv’d his Majesty many Years by Sea and Land, in the Mediterranean. No Action of Note was perform’d without him, since the Expedition of Navarino against the Turks, and the His brave Actions. others that ensu’d in those Parts, in Naples, in Portugal, and all those that occur’d before, till his Majesty was put in Possession of that Crown. Lastly, When he commanded the Spanish Galleys he fought those of the Moors and Turks, with the Galiots, and Brigantines of the Levant, and English Ships, and took and sunk several of both Sorts. He took a great Number of Slaves in Barbary; particularly at Zangazon, Benegicar, and Alcazar. He defended Cadiz from the Invasion, and Rapine of Drake, the English Admiral, who attempted it with a mighty Fleet. This was done by only four Galleys, but two of which were clean, yet the Bravery of the Commander made amends for all. How great an Action this was, and what Reputation Don Pedro gain’d by it, appear’d afterwards, when the English again possess’d themselves of Cadiz, at the Time that all the Galleys in Spain were in the Bay, and the Fleet then preparing to sail to the Indies. In each of these Actions, most whereof were victorious, there are many remarkable Particulars, and they all deserve large Encomiums; but since they do not belong to the Subject of this History, it would be blameable to insert them here.

The King for these Reasons constituted Don Pedro de Acunna, his Captain General, in the Province of Cartagena and Tierra Firme, and Commander of the Galleys on that Coast; which Commissions had never before been united in that Government. He gave him a Galley, and Orders to receive the Royal Fifths of the Pearl-Fishery, at the Island Margarita. He set out from the Port of Sanlucar, on the 27th of September, in a Pink, with 12 Soldiers, His Voyage. some Religious Men, and his Servants, the Galley, and another Ship following. The Winds soon rose, and the Sea swell’d, and the Vessels were dispers’d. In one of them there were 20 Soldiers, and 40 Slaves at the Oar, this was so far drove away, that they saw it no more, till five Days after they came to Cartagena. The Storm ceas’d, and Don Pedro arriv’d at Gran Canaria, but would not go into the City. He took in two hundred Cask of Water. The Governour Don Lewis de la Cueva was not in the Island; but it being known in his Family that Don Pedro was come, they sent to welcome him. The Visit was follow’d by some Horses loaded with Abundance of Fowl, Game, Sheep, Wine, Pears, and most stately Quinces, besides Abundance of other Provisions. He sail’d thence with a favourable Wind, which soon turn’d against him, and tho’ he was far enough off, drove back the Ships in Sight of Teneriffe. After being toss’d about for [130]some Days, there happened such a tedious Calm between two Islands, as made Amends for the Violence of the Storms, and yet he had others afterwards as violent as those before. Many Days after, when they had lost their reckning, they arriv’d at the Island Metalinon, inhabited by unconquered Indians, where they took in Water without Opposition, for the Rest of the Voyage. Thence he had fair Weather to the Island Margarita. As soon as he landed in the Harbour, Don John Sarmiento de Villandrando, the Governour of the Island came to meet him, having hourly expected him, since he knew he was to come. The rejoycing, and Entertainment was such as became Friends, and Friends of that Quality.

An English Ship near the Island Margarita. An English Ship of above four hundred Tun Burthen, with thirty Pieces of Cannon of five thousand Weight each, and Abundance of Men, had been 30 days in a Harbour but two Leagues from the Island Margarita. Don John Sarmiento telling Don Pedro, what Insolences that Ship committed, and how much to his Disreputation she oppress’d the Islanders under his Government, desir’d he might attack her with his Galley. Don Pedro perswaded him to desist from that Enterprize, since it did not belong to him, and it was an unpardonable Fault to attack her, without an equal Force. Don John persisted so long, that he carry’d it against Don Pedro’s Opinion. They made to the Place where the Ship lay, passing by dangerous Rocks, and being come in Sight of it, perceiv’d it was stronger, and better provided than they had been told. Our Men, in Order to fight, turn’d out all the Women, most of them Wives to those that came in the Galleys. Twenty Soldiers came from the Island Margarita, by their Governours Order, who being ship’d they appear’d by Break of Day in Sight of the Enemy. The Wind then The Islanders oblige Don Pedro to Fight her. blowing fresh Don Pedro advising with the Natives of the Island Margarita and their Governour told them, it was requisite to expect a Calm, in Order to take the Ship, since the Galley could wait for it under Shelter, without any Danger. The Islanders being provok’d by the Dammage they had receiv’d, and to flatter Don John Sarmiento, answer’d, That they had two of the Prime Men of that Ship Prisoners in the City, by whose Account they were inform’d of the Distress she was in, and that she must surrender, as soon as attack’d. This Opinion being bandy’d about with Obstinacy, came to be Positiveness in Don John. Don Pedro looking upon it as such, and concerned to see his Friend engag’d in such a Piece of Madness, with those Hot, but unexperienc’d Men, said to them, By my long Experience in several Seas, I know it is the worst of Conduct to attack a Ship, when she has the Wind; but let us fall on; that the People of the Island Margarita may not have it to say that I deferr’d engaging out of Fear, and not out of Discretion. This said, he order’d his Galley to weigh Anchor. He arm’d himself, and Don John, and just as the Sun appear’d they attack’d the Ship The Engagement. with Fury and Violence. The English were not backward; they speedily cut the Cables of three Anchors they had out, and leaving them in the Sea, set their Sails. The Wind was fair and soon fill’d them. The Men were brisk and ply’d their Cannon without ceasing. Our Galley did the same, and fir’d five Shot, before it receiv’d any Harm. Then she ran her Beak against the Poop of the Ship, but could not grapple, nor board. Some Men went down to the Boats which were tow’d by the Ship, and cut the Ropes. The Ship, and Galley fell a firing again, without Intermission. [131]Don Pedro receiv’d a Musquet Shot on his Target, which glancing off broke in Pieces a Board of the Stern Lockers, and wounded those that were next it. A Cannon Ball took of the Head of one of our Slaves, and scatter’d his Brains in Don Pedro’s Face; but another Ball touch’d him nearer, when it threw Don John Sarmiento into the Sea, who being sunk by the Weight of his Armour, was never seen again. Fourteen Soldiers of the Island Margarita, and nine Spaniards were kill’d, and many wounded, of all whom Don Pedro took Care, without neglecting the other Duties of a Commander. Some Persons of Note were also kill’d, as Alonso de Anduxar, a Youth about twenty Years of Age, of the Order of Christ, and Antonio Santiso, who had been a Captain in Flanders. The Ship holding on her Course, made the best of the fair Wind, and was seen to fly, as if she had been victorious; tho’ she threw many dead Bodies over Board, in Sight of our Men. Don Pedro return’d to the Island Margarita, lamenting the Death of his Friend, and his Wifes Widow-Hood, amidst the Tears of other Widows, and Fathers left Childless. He comforted the afflicted the best he could, received the King’s Boxes of Peals, and went on much griev’d at the Event, and to see how little his Precaution had avail’d.

Don Pedro had a prosperous Passage thence, to the Island Curazao, to Rio de la Hacha, and so in Sight of Cartagena. Being descry’d from the City Don Pedro at Cartagena. the Galleys went out to meet him, whose Musick and Guns, with those of the Fort made a Mixture of Harmony and Noise. He enter’d upon the Government and immediately took a View of the Galleys, Warlike Prepations being of the greatest Consequence in those Parts. He found them shatter’d, and almost gone to Ruin, refitted one, and furnish’d another with Slaves, and all other Necessaries. All things were before in such Disorder, and Confusion, that it was hard to distinguish betwixt the Galley Slaves and the Soldiers, the former going about as free, and gay as the latter. He blam’d this Liberty, and order’d the Heads and Beards of the Slaves to be shav’d, and that they should be chain’d. Next he took in hand the Divisions, Manners, and civil Government of the City, and there was soon a Reformation of Abuses, and publick Crimes, all this he perform’d by his Valour, and Example. He also review’d the Horse and Foot; repair’d the Fortifications; attended all Martial Affairs; had his Gates always open to decide Controversies, without Distinction of Persons; and tho’ he had here considerable Opportunities offer’d him, and much Matter to discover his Capacity, and the Greatness of his Soul, yet he found in himself greater Hopes and Desires, above what was present, and exciting him to advance farther, and to make known to the World that generous Restlessness, which was afterwards serviceable to the Church, by restoring its former Honour, in the remotest Provinces.

The End of the Fifth Book.

