---
heading: Book 2
linkTitle: Book 2
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---



In the Philippine Islands they give the Name of Carcoas to a sort of Carcoas, what sort of Vessels, and others. Vessels that use Oars, open, and bigger than our Barks, and are Steer’d by two Rudders, the one ahead, and the other astern. 

The Ternates call’d them Janguas, which differ from the Carcoas only in having two Half-Moons of Wood, Painted, or Guilt, rising above the Keel at the Head and Poop. About 100 Men Row in each of them, to the sound of a Tabor, and a Bell. They carry twenty Soldiers, and six Musketiers. The rest are employ’d about four or five little Brass Guns. Both the Men that Row, and the Soldiers are Arm’d with Campilanes, that is Cymiters, and Shields, and abundance of Calabays, and Sagus, being long Canes burnt in the Fire, to harden them; which they throw, without tacking, as the Moors do their Darts. Their way of Fighting is to come within Gun-shot, and as soon as they have Fir’d, both sides fly with all speed, till they have Loaded again, and then return to the same Post. They set three Men to each Gun, the one Levels, the other Charges, and the third Fires it. This is the way among the Islanders; for when they have to do with Europeans, our Example has Improv’d them in the Art of War. But in their Carcoas they are always expos’d to be kill’d by our Cannon, because they have no Fights to cover them; and the same is in the Champanes, which differ but little from the others.

The Victory we have spoken of Encourag’d the Tydores, and with the Assistance of the Spaniards, they Arm’d, and falling upon Gaca, a Town of Ternate, Plunder’d and Burnt it; but at their Return, they met with Martin Correa, whom they Fought, plying their Carcoas, the Success remaining doubtful. Whilst this War was at the hottest, Don George de Meneses Don George de Meneses at Ternate. came from the Papuas to Ternate, to whom Don Garcia presently resign’d the Post, tho’ the Hostilities continu’d, with Burning and Slaughter on both sides, which it was expected would be greater when the Portuguese Succours came from Malaca, and the Castilian from Spain. The new Portuguese Commander in Chief, and Martin Inniguez came to a Conference, and with much Courtesy, and desire of Peace, concluded a Truce, which lasted not long, tho’ not on account of the main cause.

There were many Battles between the Spanish and Portuguese Nations, [18]from Gilolo and other adjacent Islands, about the Possession of the Moluccos, and they were under several Commanders, the Event whereof we shall see in its Place. Therefore, and because others have Treated of them Copeously, they shall be now pass’d by, that we may return to the Actions of those Kings, which ought to be distinctly deliver’d now at the Beginning, for the better Understanding of the Causes why they came to be Lost.

King of Tydore makes Peace. The King of Tydore was less Supported by Spain than he had been before, and was therefore oblig’d to sue for Peace, laying some Burden of Tribute, on his own Revenue proceeding from the Cloves. He also promis’d never to admit of any Spanish Succours; besides some other Conditions, which put an end to the Wars for a time.

We have already observ’d, That Cachil Boleyfe, King of Ternate, left three lawful Sons, viz. Cachil Bayano, Cachil Dayalo, and Cachil Tabarija. The Eldest of them was not above six Years of Age; besides whom there Daroes, and the Queen govern Ternate. were seven Bastards, the Eldest of them, Cachil Daroes, was Governor of the Kingdom, in Conjunction with the Queen. When Brito, in the Year 1521, Built the Fort, to secure the Subjection of the Island, tho’ he had another Pretence for it, he took the Infant King, and the Queen his Mother, into it. She generously resenting this Violence, as not able to endure, that they should oppose the course of her Government, which she manag’d, together with her Step-Son, loudly Complain’d, and Threatned, as a Queen, and as a Mother. She wanted no Conveniencies for the Education of the Children; but there being Wrong disguiz’d among all that seeming Kindness, neither her Family, nor the Nurse, nor the Perswasions of Great Persons, could appease her Anger. The Natives observ’d the Difference of the Portuguese Domination, and that since their building of that Fort, they us’d intolerable Rigor, and consequently began to grow cold in their Affection, Portuguese Insolent. and to slacken in their Respect; especially when they perceiv’d that Brito’s Successor continu’d to keep the Royal Family under Oppression. The young King was bred up in the Fort, till he was of Age to enter upon the Government of his Kingdom; and being 18 years old, soon dy’d, not without the usual suspition of Poison, but it was affirm’d to be given by private order of Cachil Daroes. O the wonderful Effects of the Desire of Rule!

Sultan Bayano being Dead, order was taken that the People should immediatly Swear Cachil Dayalo; but Don George found also means to get him into the Fort; the Mother demanding him, as fearing his Death, by the example of the Elder. Don George condescended, not so much in compliance They Insult the Natives. to her Fears, as to oblige Cachil Daroes, with whose Government he was well-satisfy’d; and it was he that had interven’d in, and advis’d that way of Breeding the Princes. Soon after there happen’d an Accident, which broke off their good Intelligence; for Daroes grew jealous of the Commander in chiefs Behaviour, observing him much to favour Cachil Bayaco, a Man of note, whose Friendship he was suspicious of, and he with reason fear’d, that the Commander would in time value Bayaco more than him. This well grounded Fear grew up in his Breast, till it turn’d to down right Hatred, and he contriv’d to kill Don George. The Design could not be carry’d on so private, as to be conceal’d from him, and he to disappoint it, retir’d into the Fort. Daroes puffed up with the Applause of the People, sent immediatly to require him to deliver up Bayaco, to try [19]him upon some Complaints he had against him, being his Judge, as Governour, and oblig’d to do Justice. Don George was desirous to save Cachil Bayaco, and to that purpose assembled the Alcayde, and other Officers. Some said he ought to deliver him, others advis’d to appease Daroes by fair means. Bayaco, who hated him so mortally, that he woul’d chuse any sort of Death, rather than fall into his Hands, being lock’d up in a Room of the Fort, understood that his Case was doubtful, for they Consulted without any great Privacy. This made him Resolve what to do, and going to a high Window, he threw himself out with such Fury, that he beat himself to Pieces. Don George was troubl’d at the Accident, and thought himself oblig’d to Revenge it; which he began upon finding a Sow kill’d, either to spight him, or because the Neighbours were Mahometans, and had done it as she graz’d, or went about the Courts of the Fort. This was a rediculous Occasion, but of Moment enough among those People; Enquiry was made who had kill’d her, and it appear’d, or Don George would have it, that the Fault belong’d to Cachil Baydua, a near Kinsman to Cachil Daroes, very Learned, and Zealous in the Law of Mahomet, as also a Caciz, or Priest, and of great Authority in the Kingdom. He was seiz’d by Don George, and carry’d into the Fort, without regard to the publick Peace. Daroes, in a great Consternation, went with the chief Men of the Kingdom, to desire he would release that Sacred Person. Whilst they were discoursing this Point, Peter Fernandez, a mean Fellow, Servant to the Commander in Chief, by his Masters Order, or of his own Accord, in the Presence of them all, went up to Cachil Baydua, and rubb’d his Mouth, Rudeness. and Face with a fat Collop of the same Sow, neither the Opposition he made, nor his Complaints to God, and the Commander in Chief availing him; but on the contrary, the Portugueses laugh’d out aloud, approving the Action by their Applause. Daroes on his part, cast himself on the Ground, and Weeping, prevail’d to have Baydua restor’d to him, whom, Don George being satisfy’d, or appeas’d, and taking Security, sent to his House. Daroes attended him, and all the Prime Men; and Baydua, by Reason it is an Abomination among them to touch Swines-Flesh, presently used their Purifications; and the more to express his Concern, voluntarily left the Island for some Years, and travel’d about all the others in the Neighbourhood, preaching, and magnifying the Affront offer’d to one of Mahomets Priests, thus stirring up the Natives, and perswading them to Unite in Defence of their Honour.

This Accident, which as a Disgrace to their Religion, exasperated the People, was seconded by another much worse, which quite render’d the Portugueses Odious. The contrary Winds kept back the Trading Galeon, Portugueses become odious for Rapine, &c. that us’d to carry the Soldiers Pay, and their Wants increasing, they began to seek Relief, breaking into the Natives Shops, and Store-Houses, and taking away their Provisions, without Paying for them. Daroes, offended at it, order’d, That no Provisions should be brought into the City to sell, and that the Shops which dealt in them, should be shut up. This was accordingly done, and reduc’d those in the Fort to such Distress, that the Soldiers mutinying, rail’d at their own Commander, and the Governour of India, demanding Relief with their Arms in their Hands. Don George being hard press’d, and blaming the Avarice of his Country Men, sent some [20]Carcoas with Soldiers, under the Command of Gomez Ariaz, to barter Goods in the adjacent Islands for Provisions. They Landed on an Island near by, where, being desperate with Hunger, they Plunder’d the Town of Tabona, the Inhabitants whereof, no longer able to endure such Affronts, and Robberies, running to Arms, fell upon them, and kill’d the greatest Number, and most of the rest being Wounded, were Disarm’d. They embark’d for Ternate, where their Wounds and Nakedness spoke what had befallen them, as much as their Words. Don George, who, besides his being naturally Passionate, was now quite enrag’d, threatned Daroes, That if he did not deliver up the principal Actors in this Mischief, he would seek his Revenge other ways. He was obey’d, and tho’ Cachil Daroes knew that all the Fault belong’d to the Portugueses, yet he deliver’d up the Governor of Tabona, and two other Chief Men of the Place, to Don George, thinking he would be satisfy’d with keeping them Prisoners for Barbarous Cruelty. some Days. As soon as they were brought before him, he order’d the Hands of the two to be cut off, and that they should be then set at liberty. The Governors Punishment was answerable to the Cruelty of him that was his Judge; they ty’d his Hands behind his Back, and exposing him on the Shore, set two fierce Woolf-Dogs upon him, he having no way to withstand their Fury, made several vain attempts to slip aside from them, and endeavour’d to defend himself with what little Power was left him in those Limbs that were not Bound. The Multitude with Horror beheld the Spectacle, touch’d with Compassion, and admiring the Inhumanity of the Punishment. The wretched Man attempted to Fly, but perceiving that the arm’d Soldiers, had shut up every way, on the Land side, he cast himself into the Sea, the only Refuge accidentally left him, to seek some uncertain Hope of Safety. However the Dogs being already blooded, left him not; but barking and howling, bit and tore him, tho’ he still swam with his Legs. At last, being desperate, and almost in the last Agony, he took a horrid Resolution and fell upon those fierce Creatures with his Teeth; such was the Effect of Pain and Despair. Thus the unhappy Man took hold of one of the Dogs by the Ear, and holding fast, sunk with him to the Bottom. The like Barbarity had never before been seen in any of those Countries to which the Portugueses Traded; and by it they lost the Reputation they had before gain’d, to their great Applause, that they inflicted Punishments, as it were by Compulsion, and Oblig’d to it, and that with Mildness, and Compassion, to shew their Generosity.

Conspiracy to destroy the Portugueses. This Action brought them into general Hatred, and all the People of the Molucco Islands being exited by Cachil Daroes, contriv’d to kill Don George, with all the Portugueses and Spaniards, and so deliver themselves from their Yoke. Daroes undertook to Unite all the Kings of those Islands in a League against the Christians; sent away trusty Persons to stir up the Confederates; and particularly to Cachil Catabruno, Governor of Gilolo, during that Kings Minority, advising him, at a Time appointed, to rise in Arms against the Spaniards inhabiting his Dominions, and then to kill the Infant King, and Usurp the Crown; for the compassing whereof he promis’d his Assistance, for they should both make that their common Cause, because he design’d the same Slaughter upon the Portugueses, and upon the Infant King Sultan Dayalo, whom he would Succeed in the Throne, and never submit [21]to any Spanish Tyranny. At this time the Voice of the Gospel resounded in the Ears of the Barbarous Nations of the Archipelago, by the Preaching of the Religious Men of the Orders of St. Augustin, St. Dominick, and St. Francis, and of Father Francis Naverius, a Jesuit, and his Companions; Churches were built, and therefore God, who was taught by them, would not suffer the Ministers of the Gospel to be extirpated. Don George was inform’d of the Conspiracy, and the Preparations that were making to put it in Execution, which he kept to himself. Daroes, the better to disemble it, never absented himself, but resorted to the Fort, and paid Visits to the Governour; sometimes when sent for by him, and others, of his own Accord. He sent one Day desiring he would come to him, and bring Cachil Tamarano, Admiral of the Island, and Cachil Boio, the chief Justice of the Kingdom, to treat about some important Affairs. Cachil Daroes knowing nothing of Don George’s Design, took those two Cachils with him, and went away to the Fort. Don George receiv’d them courteously, Daroes and others put to Death. and with a chearful Countenance; but being come into a Room where all Things were prepar’d for the Purpose, they were seiz’d and put to the Rack, on which they discover’d the Conspiracy. Immediately he pass’d Sentence upon them in Form, and at the same time caus’d a Scaffold to be erected, adjoyning to the Fort, on the Outside, where the People were already gather’d in a Crowd. Then Cachil Daroes being brought out, and plac’d high on the Scaffold, a Cryer proclaim’d his Crimes, and the Penalty he was condemn’d to. His Head was cut off, and his Companions put to a less honourable Death; but what that was, no History or Relations inform us.

The Queen and all the Natives, were so terrify’d by this Action, that Natives fly, and streighten the Portugueses. they fled out of the City, to a craggy strong Mountain at the Town of Toruto: Thence the Queen sent to demand her Son, whom the Governour kept as a Prisoner; but he not answering her Letter, she was so offended at, and jealous of his Silence, that she caus’d Proclamation to be made, forbidding all the People of the Island, upon Pain of Death, to sell any Provisions, or other Necessaries, to the Portugueses. Her Orders were readily obey’d, and the Portugueses press’d by Hunger, found it a more powerful Enemy, than those they had wrong’d. Their Skins began to shrivel, they grew Lank and Weak, and must have perish’d, had not Gonzalo Pereyra arriv’d then with the Trading Galeon. Gonzalo Pereyra came from Malaca to succeed Don George de Meneses in the Post of Ternate; and improving the Opportunity, touch’d at Borneo, where he visited the King, with whom, the Spaniards not obstructing, he settled perpetual Peace and Amity; thence he set out immediately for Ternate, where he arriv’d in Safety. He presently took Possession of the Fort, and paid the weak Soldiers. The Queen went to visit him, and to complain of Don George, New Governour. and demand her Son Cachil Dayalo, which was her greatest Concern. Gonzalo Pereyra answer’d her generously, promis’d to do her Justice; and to begin, secur’d Don George in the Principal Tower, to appease the Queen, engaging i i. Word, That he would restore her Son, as soon as the Fort was in a good Posture. He sent to intreat her to return to the City, and former Amity; that Justice might be peaceably administer’d. She seeing some Effects of his Promise, in the Imprisonment of [22]her Enemy, and the Expectation of Releasing the King her Son, turn’d past Sorrow into Joy, return’d to Court, and Gonzalo Pereyra reform’d Abuses, repair’d the Fort, and built Bastions of Square Stone, which till then had been unhew’d, the Queen furnishing Workmen and Materials. Still Cachil Dayalo was detain’d in the Fort, without being restor’d to his Liberty; and the Queen and People help’d to build the Fort, as the sure Means of obtaining their King’s Liberty. Gonzalo Pereyra, when he thought it a proper Time, resolv’d to execute some Orders he had brought from Goa, which were the same that had before endanger’d the Disturbance of those Kingdoms.

Fresh Uproars caus’d by the Governour. Some Governours, says the Portuguese Historian, Couto, only study to enrich themselves, impoverishing the Provinces, and their King; for no Prince can be rich, if his Grandeur depends upon poor Subjects. The Governour now perceiving that all Things were quiet, and he had little or no Dependance on those People, made Proclamation, that none should buy Cloves in those Islands, but the King, his Master’s Factors. At the same Time he order’d, that his Officers should enter the Houses of marry’d Men, which are the Richest, and take away all their Cloves; and this not only among the Natives, but in the Habitations, and Colonies of the Portugueses, paying for it after the Country Rate; and that they should break all their Weights, Scales and Measures, and other Implements of this Sort, all which he caus’d to be publickly burnt. The Island was again in an Uproar, and the Portugueses were for quitting it, because it was to no Purpose to live there, if they were depriv’d of that Trade. Most of the Portugueses repair’d to the House of Ferdinand Lopez, a Priest, who was the Bishop’s Vicar in the Fort, and ought to have given them an Example of Modesty. There one Vincent Fonseca, a seditious Fellow, heading the Mutiniers, they resolv’d to require the Governour to permit them to live in their former Liberty; and in case he should not Consent, they would depart the Fort, and the Country, and go over to the Spaniards, or else to the Mahometans, and Idolaters Towns. Some there were, who boggled at the Crime of abandoning the Service of their King, together with the Portugueses mutiny. Fort; and voted it would be less Harm to procure the Governour’s Death, by Means of the Natives. Whilst they were thus unresolv’d, the Governour sent to seize Vincent de Fonseca, for some disrespectful Words he had spoken upon this Occasion, to another Soldier who was viewing the Guards. The Multitude, who had already given themselves up to the Direction of Fonseca, were as much concern’d at his Imprisonment, as if every one of them had been put into Irons; and as generally in such Mutinies, they are not without some specious Pretence, tho’ it be but superficial, many of the Seditious, being incens’d, and resolute, repair’d to the Queen’s Palace, where they were easily admitted, and some of them to more Privacy with certain Counsellors of her’s. There they represented the Hardship of depriving them of the Trade of Clove, without any Demerit on their Side. But, said they, they may as well deprive us of this common Air, of this Light, and of the Benefit of our Senses. Our Kings give no such Orders; but they proceed from the Avarice of the Governours and Commanders, who tyrannize over us, and this Man more than all his Predecessors, being come to destroy, that which he was sent to preserve. [23]He has no Design to restore your Majesty your Son; but on the contrary we are satisfy’d he contrives to destroy both the Son and the Mother. Her he will secure, as soon as he has brought his Works to perfection, that he may not be again kept from Provisions. If you will stand up for your Country, and kill the Commander, we shall not obstruct it, but on the contrary shall be as vigorous to act against him, as we are ready to promise it.

The Queen and her Councellors were well pleas’d, hoping by that The Queen stirs up her People. means to get rid of Tyrants, as they call’d them, and therefore would not let slip so favourable an opportunity to compass their Ends. The Queen assembled the prime Men of the Island; represented to them the Condition it was in; put them in mind, how King Boleyfe her Husband, protected the Portugueses, who came thither in Distress; how they had sworn Amity, and solemnly given their Hands upon it; the Honour and Kindness he show’d them; and that for their sakes he forfeited the good will of the Neighbouring Princes; that after he had receiv’d them, he maintain’d Wars, and sustain’d losses, even to the hazard of his life, to protect them; that he treated them as affectionately as if they had been his own Children; and how they, in return for his Entertainment and Favours, as soon as the Breath was out of his Body, presum’d, said she, to lay violent Hands on me; from whose Tyranny and Oppression I escaped, by absconding long among the Rocks, and Brambles. My Children, they snatch’d from their Nurses Breasts, to confine them in Prison; in their own Kingdom, and among their Subjects. When Cachil Bayano came to age to govern, they poyson’d him. They now design after the same manner to destroy his Brother, a lawful King, as if he were some run-away Slave. See what regard a parcel of intruding Strangers have for your Fortunes, your Houses, your Daughters, and your Wives, in your own Country, and in my Presence. Any one of these things ought to be a sufficient motive to cast off the Yoke we laid upon our Necks through our own Credulity. What then will not they all together oblige us to do? But besides all this, what ought we not to do, seeing our Religion affronted? Our Temples polluted? Our Priests trampled on? And all our selves in general despis’d? Can you have a greater Testimony of the justice of your Cause, than to see the Portugueses themselves on your side? Do not let slip this Opportunity, my Friends, stand by them, since they promise to assist us. Deliver by their means your King, your Country, and your Religion; that all these may be afterwards rescu’d from them, and we may exclude such ungrateful Guests.

These and other Exhortations made by the Queen, as Mafeus writes in Conspiracy against the Governor. his Latin History, were receiv’d with Abundance of Tears, and they all engag’d to put their helping hands to the execution of what had been concerted; and fixt the day and hour. Great Dissimulation was us’d, and the Queen forwarded the work of the Fort with much application, without sparing any Cost, giving out, so as it might come to the Governour’s Ears, That the King her Sons Liberty depended on the finishing of the Fort. This was the effect of Motherly Affection. The appointed Day being come, the Natives appear’d in Arms, just during the scorching Heat of the Noon-day; Some hid themselves in a Mosque, behind the Fort; others in a Wood, not far off, all of them ready to assault it, upon a Signal given, they being to enter at a Breach, which was not yet made up. Some [24]of the Arm’d Islanders slily mixt themselves among the Masons, and Labourers, and among the King’s Servants, who were going and coming with kind Messages between the Son and the Mother, and by this means convey’d him his Arms, and being us’d to talk to him freely at other times, they had then the Opportunity of acquainting him with the Design, and advising to be in a readiness to fall on boldly in due time. Thence they went to the Governour’s Apartment, where he was taking his Afternoons Nap in all possible Security, his whole Family being asleep. The Ternates burst the Doors open with their Shoulders, and rush’d upon the Governour, whom the noise had awak’d. He defended himself with his Sword and Buckler for a considerable space; but his Enemies being numerous, and all His Death. pressing forwards, they cut him in pieces. A Woman-slave of his hearing the Hubbub, shreek’d out, which with the other Noise brought the Islanders out of the Mosque, without expecting the Signal. They laid hold of a Portuguese they met, but he broke loose, and escap’d their Fury by flight. The Slave continu’d crying out, Moors, Moors. With this the Governour’s Servants came running arm’d, and going up to the chief Tower, where their Master was wont to divert himself, found all the Murderers there, whom they laid hold of, and cast down headlong, and then shut the Gates of the Fort. Then they rang the Bell, the sound whereof, and their not hearing the Signal, discourag’d the Ternates who lay in Ambush, so that they slunk away into the City.

The Portugues Conspirators went slily dissembling into the Fort, and finding the Governour dead, requir’d the rest in his place to admit of the Alcayde, or Constable of the Fort, because the King of Portugal had so order’d. They refus’d him, and particularly the Vicar, who took upon him Fonseca made Governour. to head them all, and prevail’d so far that they chose Vincent de Fonseca for their Governour, who immediately took Possession of the Fort, and beginning to go on in the Tyrannical Design of Gonzalo Pereyra, left the Trade of Clove as it was before; but secur’d King Dayalo. No notice was taken of the Governour’s Death, as being executed by the consent of them all. The Queen insisted to demand her Son, since she had furnish’d all Necessaries for that Work; Vincent Fonseca refer’d the Answer to the Marry’d Men. All those Nations are of opinion that the discreetest among them are the Marry’d Men, both on account of their Age, and as more faithful Councellors, because they have a greater interest in the publick Good, and therefore it is usual to refer to them all Debates and Answers in matters of Difficulty. They all voted, That the Queen should not have her Son deliver’d to her, because it was convenient to keep him as an Hostage, fearing the second part of what had been concerted, and that their Friendships would last no longer than till it could be executed. But to palliate the true cause of detaining him, they answered, That they must first acquaint the Governour of India. In the mean while the Mother did not cease to weep, and to intreat. She fed upon these Hopes, grounded on the Hatred the Portugueses still retain’d for Pereyra, and on the Generosity she had us’d in restoring the Trade of Clove, and other means. The most prevalent of these seem’d to be the gaining the affections of the Marry’d Portugueses, to whom that Affair was referred, and under-hand of Vincent Fonseca himself, by rich Presents, and extraordinary Gifts. But she was [25]soon undeceived, for Fonseca offered her such Reasons or Excuses, as proved his Tyrannical Design; alledging, that having already sent to consult the Governour of India about the King’s Liberty, it was not in his power to come to any Resolution in that affair, till the Answer came from Goa, for they would cut off his Head, should he go about to act of himself. The Queen perceiving that neither Gifts, nor Intreaties would prevail to get her Son, she resolv’d to use Force.

She stir’d up all the Neighbouring Kingdoms against the Portugueses; The Queen recovers her Son by force. and order’d the Provisions to be all remov’d, that none might come to the Fort, either by Sea or Land. Those within began to feel the want of all Necessaries, to such a degree, that they su’d to the Queen for Peace, which was concluded, and they gave up her Son, which was the only thing she aim’d at, without regarding the inconveniency of losing the Fort. The Queen having obtain’d the King’s Liberty, granted the Portugueses all the Conditions they demanded, and was so throughly appeas’d that the Christians continu’d their Settlements and Colonies, and Trade, and Provisions were restor’d. The Queen put the Government into the hands of her Son, who at first shew’d some Severity and Harshness towards the prime Men, and discover’d some Weaknesses, which till then his Confinement had either conceal’d, or suppress’d. These things render’d him so odious, that the case was alter’d, and they would have been glad he had been Prisoner again. The Mother could not curb his ill Inclination, for the extravagant Youth’s deprav’d Nature would not allow of it.

At this time three mean Fellows of the Portugueses Colony, went to those of the Natives to rob; besides which they ravish’d some Women. The Portuguese Robbers kill’d. Islanders would not bear with that Insolence; but those who had been wrong’d in revenge kill’d the Offenders. Vincent de Fonseca hearing of it, magnify’d the Heinousness of the Fact, without mentioning his Countrymens Guilt, and order’d strict Enquiry to be made after the Slayers. What Care ought Princes to take to secure the Affection of their Subjects. The King was so hated, that certain Natives went to the Governour, and being conducted into a private part of the Fort, because they were Men of Quality, they assur’d him that the King had been the Occasion of the killing of those Portugueses, grounding the Accusation on their own Surmises, and aggravating the Offence with other Circumstances, in such manner, that had Fonseca lov’d the King, he could not but have believ’d them. He presently contriv’d to seize him; but being impatient, and despairing of securing him by Art, had recourse to Force. The King did the like, tho’ King of Ternate flies. sensible how little Assistance he could expect from his People, however he arm’d a few Vessels, and falling upon some Christian Towns, took several Prisoners. The Governour on the other Hand, without sparing Ternate, attacked what Towns he could, so that Cruelty and Rapine were again in use, even to assaulting of Cities, the very Sufferers approving of it, and pleas’d with their Losses, that so they might be reveng’d of their King. He fearing that the Hatred they bore him, might occasion his being seiz’d and deliver’d up to Fonseca, went over to Tydore, where that King for the present entertain’d and assisted him, as a Friend and Relation. The Governour sent with speed to call the King’s younger Brother, named Sultan Tabarija, who was fled with some Malecontents, and with the consent of [26]Sultan Tabarija made King. all the rest of the People, who were before no less dissatisfy’d, proclaim’d him King, with all the Forms and Ceremonies us’d in that case. Many approv’d of it, yet some were scandaliz’d. The same Division reign’d among the Portugueses, remembring the unjust Election of Vincent de Fonseca, and that he was the first and main instrument of the Death of Gonzalo Pereyra. Fonseca himself was not at Peace with his own Conscience; but so full of Apprehensions and Dread, that he was never unarm’d, disconsolate, melancholy, and attended by all those ill Symptoms, the Memory of Guilt produces in the Mind; and he could wish he were discharg’d of the Burden he had taken upon him. The new King Tabarija began his Reign shewing Kindness to all Men, and cherishing the Portugueses, which offended his absent Brother; and administer’d occasion to irritate the Kings of Tydore and Ternate against him so hastily, that he immediately broke the Peace, and declar’d himself their Enemy.

Tristan de Atayde Governour of Ternate. At this time Tristan de Atayde came to Ternate, whose Presence brought all Things into better Form. He appeas’d the Queen, and commending Tabarija’s Government, gain’d his Affection. Trade went on without any Obstruction. Vincent de Fonseca imbark’d for India, and was seiz’d by the Viceroy of Goa, for the heinous Crimes he had committed in the Molucco Islands, whence a full Account of them was sent with him; yet he was not punish’d, but liv’d quietly for the future. Ternate flourish’d under this mild Government; the King, his Subjects, and the Portuguese Officers being united; but all those Garrisons so remote from the Head, being Receptacles of seditious Persons, who are contriving Innovations to disturb the Peace, and thrive by Discord, there wanted not some Promoters of such Changes, who perverted Tristan de Atayde, and divested him of his former Mildness. About the beginning of his Government two Carcoas of Barbarians plunder’d and almost destroy’d the City Momoya, the Inhabitants whereof were Idolaters, in the Island Moro. The Lord of it a powerful Sangiack, and good Moral Man, tho’ a Heathen, made his Escape. Gonzalo Velloso, a Portuguese, was then not far from his City, following his Trade, and going thither, upon his paying a Visit to the Sangiack, he told him the Havock that had been made, complaining of the dangerous Neighbourhood of the other Islanders, and asking his Advice, how he might be reveng’d and secur’d for the future. Velloso, God directing his Tongue, told him, That the surest way was to sue for Peace to the Commander in chief of the Moluccos, and entertain Amity with the Portugueses, for if his Enemies once saw he was supported by their Power, no King nor Sangiack would dare to offend him. He assur’d him that the King of Portugal sent them for that End, being oblig’d to put down Tyranny and Oppression; but that for the obtaining that benefit more fully, it was requisite he should become a Christian; for by that means he would save his Soul, and secure his Escape, which was the least important of the A Sangiack converted. two. Velloso said so much to this Point, and the Spirit which directed, suggested such important Truths, that the Sangiack at first admiring them, approv’d and submitted to them, and grew very earnest to be admitted to Baptism. He desir’d Gonzalo Velloso to be assisting to him, and gathering some of his Family and Friends, they set out for Ternate, the Sangiack himself staying behind for their Answer. The Heathens came with Velloso [27]to Ternate, where they were generously received, and entertain’d by Tristan de Ataide. Having heard what they came about, he put them all into the Christian Habit, appointing Clergy-men to instruct and Catechize them. Being thus prepar’d, they receiv’d Baptism with extraordinary satisfaction, the Commander in chief being their God-father. Then he commended the Sangiack’s Resolution, shewing how advantageous it would be to him to become a Son of the Church, and reject the abominable and foul Ceremonies of Idolatry, in which he had liv’d. He sent him word, to appoint the Day and Place for being Baptiz’d, and he would see all perform’d as he should direct, for which Reason he left it to his Choice. The Messengers returning to Momoya, were not only proud of having embrac’d the Christian Faith, but of the good Usage they receiv’d from the Governour and other Christians, telling the Sangiack all that had happen’d, and the Answer they brought him. The Sangiack, led by his own inclination, and encourag’d by their Account, imbark’d in some Carcoas with the greatest Splendor of Musick and Gayety he was able. Being come in Sight of Ternate, Tristan de Ataide went out to meet him with no less Pomp. He lodg’d and entertain’d him accordingly, and order’d a Learned and Religious Man to Catechize and instruct him. Some Days after when the Cathecumens were fitted for it, they receiv’d Baptism, with publick Rejoycings, and greater Solemnity than had ever been seen in Ternate. There was not a Christian but what brought Palm-Branches and Flowers from that natural Garden of the Island; besides Musick, Dancing, Firing of great Guns, and even the very Barbarians rejoyc’d. The Sangiack in Baptism took the Name of Don John; he stay’d some Days rejoycing and Feasting with the Portugueses, and then return’d home, taking along with him the Priest that instructed him, call’d Simon Vaz, to improve him in the Knowledge of the Faith. That Priest liv’d with him some Years in his City, leading an Exemplar Life, and exercising himself in Works of Officious and pure Charity, by which means he converted great Numbers of Heathens, and particularly the Inhabitants of Momoya. But being alone, and the Number of those God was pleased for his Glory, to bring to him increasing very fast, he sent to Tristan de Atayde for another Priest to assist him in that Function, and he accordingly sent F. Francis Alvarez. They both in a short time converted the Infidels of that Part, throwing down all the Pagodes, so they call’d their Idols, cleansing those Places, and converting the Houses of Abomination and Darkness into Churches of the living God. Tristan de Atayde so far favour’d the new Don John, as to send along with him some Portuguese Soldiers to defend his Person and Fort, and this Prince maintain’d very friendly Correspondence with him. His End we shall soon see and admire in the Sequel of this History.

The People of Ternate at the same time took another Course, for they Portugueses serve the King. hating Sultan Tabarija, and desiring his Death, talk’d with the Governour in private, and gave him to understand that his Life was in Danger, for Tabarija contriv’d to kill him, as had been done by Gonzalo Pereyra, that so he might seize the Fort, turning out the Portugueses. The Governour hearing his Life, and the Fort were both in Jeopardy, and calling to mind the yet fresh Example of his Predecessor, easily believ’d the Design, but cunningly dissembled. He contriv’d that some Portugueses on account [28]of real or pretended Differences should have Recourse to the King’s Favour, as sometimes they us’d to do, and should prevail upon him to come to the Fort to speak for them. He was apply’d to by some, and like an innocent Man suspecting nothing, went to the Fort to intercede for them. He was immediately seiz’d and loaded with Irons, and being brought to Trial, the same Persons that contriv’d his Imprisonment, appear’d as Witnesses against him. After a tedious Examination, or show of it, the Result was, that he should be sent to India to justifie himself. He imbark’d with a safe His Conversion and Death. Conscience, and his Cause being examin’d before the Viceroy Antony Barreto at Goa, he was clear’d, and confessing the Holy Spirit had taken that method to draw him to Salvation, was Baptiz’d in that City with great Satisfaction, by the Name of Don Emanuel. In his Return homewards, expecting the Monson at Malaca to put to Sea, he dy’d with extraordinary Tokens of a sincere Christian; and having no lawful Heir, appointed King John the Third of Portugal to succeed him in all his Kingdoms. The Will was afterwards carry’d to Ternate, where the great Ones and Commonalty accepted of it, owning King John for their Soveraign. This was perform’d with Acclamations in the Streets and publick Places, as also in the Courts of Judicature, taking Possession with the Royal Standard of Portugal display’d, and all other usual Solemnities and Ceremonies. In the Year 1549, Jordan de Freytas carry’d the publick Instruments of the Possession to Lisbon.

To return to the Course of the History when Tristan de Atayde had Imbark’d King Tabarija for India, he sought out for a Bastard Brother of his call’d Aerio, born of a Javanese Mother. The Lad was then ten years of Age, bred by his Mother in a retir’d manner, at a Pleasure-House encompass’d with perpetual Greens, the natural Disposition being improv’d The Melancholy Tree, and Flower. by Art, which so far prevail’d that the Flower so wonderful for its Fragrancy and manner of growing call’d Triste, or melancholy; found only in Malabar and Malaca, abounded in this Ladies Gardens. She ador’d the Sun, and brought up her Child in that Folly, that he might forget the Rudiments he learnt at Goa, when in the Colledge of the Jesuits. The Idolaters believe, or feign, that a most beautiful Daughter of Parizataco, a Satrapa, or Nobleman, fell in love with the Sun, and that he after complying with, and obliging her, setled his Affections on another, and the first not able to endure that another should be preferr’d before her, kill’d her self. From her Ashes, for in those parts they still retain the Custom of burning dead Bodies, sprung that Melancholy Tree, say they, whose Blossoms or Flowers still preserving the Memory of their Original, have such a Hatred for the Sun, that they cannot bear his Light. This Plant is call’d in the Canarine Tongue Parizataco, from the Indian Womans Father, who was Metamorphos’d like Daphne, tho’ on other Account. The Malayes call it Singadi; the Arabs, Guart; the Persians and Turks, Gul; the Decanines, Pul; and the Portuguese, Arvore Triste; that is, the Melancholy Tree. It shoots out abundance of slender Branches, regularly divided by Knots, from each of which two Leaves sprout, opposite to one another, like those of the Plum-Tree, but soft like Sage, and cover’d with a white Down. From each Leaf sprouts a Nib, or Nipple, whence five Heads shoot out small at the end, each of them adorn’d with four smaller [29]round Leaves; from each little Head proceed five Flowers, the fifth in the midst of the other four; among them the white Flowers visibly grow out, being bigger than Orange Flowers, and so fast after Night fall, that the Motion of them is perceptible. This Fruitfulness lasts all the Night, till the Appearing of the Sun renders it barren, and causes all the Flowers and Leaves to drop off, the Boughs remaining wither’d. On a sudden all that Fragrancy ceases, which enrich’d the Air with all the sweet Odours of Asia, included in this alone; till the Sun leaving the Horizon again, the Plant again flourishes in its beloved Darkness, as if it then retriev’d the Wrong it receiv’d from the Light. The Asiaticks are excessively fond of Perfumes, which is an Argument of their Lasciviousness. Great Taxes are laid in several Provinces, on all sweet Scents.

The Portugueses came arm’d to that House, where the aforesaid Princess Portuguses sent to fetch Aerio. bred her Son, and demanded him in the Name of Tristan de Atayde; she would willingly have hid him, but could not, and therefore began to excuse her self, and beg they would leave him. It avail’d nothing, for the Messengers had Orders not to return without him, and to gain her Consent, swore they would carry him to reign in the stead of Tabarija, and that as soon as he came to the Fort, he should be received as King, both by the Ternates and Portugueses. Some Relations tell us, that then the Mother, shedding Abundance of Tears, streightly embracing the Prince, cry’d out, saying, Were I assur’d that you took him away to reign peaceably, His Mother’s Speech to keep him. without any Opposition, or Apprehension, well belov’d and obey’d by his Subjects, and in settled Prosperity, undisturb’d by any Frights; yet would I rather see him grow up and continue in a private Life, without burdening himself with any publick Concern, than that he should reign to please your Humour; this was my Intention in retiring with him, and I would gladly conceal him from all humane Conversation. If so, what can I think of what you now promise me? Will it be reasonable, that I deliver you my Son to receive the Crown, and that you at the same time design him for Imprisonment and Fetters, from which nothing shall, or can possible deliver him but Poison and false Accusations, which have brought his Brothers and Parents to their End? What Security have I from Fortune, that she will in this Child be reconciled to that Family, which she has condemned to immortal Enmity with the Europeans, in Requital for having friendly entertain’d them; and decreed that, instead of the Protection it hop’d to find in your Arms, you should lay on it an intollerable Yoke? Leave us then, both Mother and Son, to employ our selves about the Works of Nature, since costly Experience has so fully undeceived as to the Effects of Fortune. Permit us to divert the Thoughts of them, with the Quiet, and Improvements of these Gardens. Let us be allow’d to want that which so many seek after. James de Couto, in his Decades relates this Fact, and the Mother’s Lamentation, and Words. The Portugueses, no longer able to give Ear to those dismal Reflections, which did not savour of a barbarous Woman, ran up to her, and forc’d away her Son, whom she struggled to defend. He, says the same Author, observing his Mother’s Tears, and the Reasons she alledg’d for not parting with him, and having some anticipated Notion of the Sweetness of Reigning, which he had not yet tasted, stood gazing on her and them, full of Confusion. The Rudeness, and Insolence [30]of the Soldiers put an End to all; for tho’ they had no such Orders from their Commander, being deaf to, and weary of hearing the Complaints of The Portuguese murder her. a Disconsolate Woman; they at the same time seiz’d the Son, and laying hold of the Mother, cast her headlong out at the Window: The new King was carry’d to the Fort, and at the same time that the Subjects swore Fidelity to him, they with general Lamentation celebrated his Mother’s Obsequies, which were perform’d with greater Solemnity, than even those of the Principal Queens. This Inhumanity exceeding even the Canibals, and consequently unworthy the pretended Portugueses Bravery; being bruited Abroad in the Neighbouring Provinces, produc’d that just Hatred which was of Force to unite; and actually drew into a Confederacy all the Kings of the Archipelago, against the Portugueses. They assembled Confederacy against them. in Council, and in the Meeting concerted their Design, declaring that the Oppression they were under, was intollerable, the Portugueses making and deposing Kings to their own Humour and Fancy, insulting those Crowns which had given them the Power they had abus’d, contrary to all Laws of Humanity, without allowing the Natives so much as a Vote in Elections. Having agreed upon the Enterprize, they provided all Things for the Execution, whilst the appointed Time came, which they diligently made as short as might be, and expected with Dissimulation.

The Spanish and Portuguese Fleets at this Time continu’d their Voyages to the Archipelago, their several known Ways; the Spaniards from New Difference about the Moluccos, between Spain and Portugal. Spain to the Phillippine Islands; the Portugueses along the Coasts of Africk, and so to Malaca. Both Sides exercised their Power, and carry’d on their Trade with Ambition, and, as some say, with Cruelty; but the most bloody Theatre of continual Tragedies, was Ternate and all the Molucco’s. There both Nations of Castile and Portugal decided their Quarrel by the Sword, whilst their Kings in Europe only contended by Dint of Cunning, and Cosmography. At this time the Matter was not so plain, as when the Cosmographers and Commissioners on both Sides, lay’d down the Meridian, whereby to assign each of them one half of the World to their King. For the Admiral Christopher Columbus returning from his first Discovery of the West-Indies, in the Year 1493, Pope Alexander the VIth. granted the Investiture of them, for the Crown of Castile, to their Catholick Majesties, King Ferdinand, and Queen Isabel, or Elizabeth; and to obviate the Differences that might arise between the two Crowns, to the obstructing the Propagation of the Gospel, by the same Apostolical Authority, which in that spiritual Capacity is not limited to any part of the Globe, he divided it betwixt those two Crowns, ordering a Line to be drawn along the Heavens to cut both the Poles, distant on the Earth one hundred Leagues from the Islands of the Azores and Cabo Verde. By Vertue of this Division, the Emperor pretended that the Molucco Islands were within his Limits, ever since Gonzalo Gomez de Espinosa, his Commander in chief, Sebastian del Cano, and his Companions, who went with Magellan, took Possession of them for his Crown. Pretending at the same Time, that they were the first Christians that arriv’d at the Moluccos, and that then he was own’d as Sovereign by Sultan Corala, King of Ternate, who reign’d before Sultan Bongue; by Sultan Almanzor, King of Tydore, by Luzuf, King of Gilolo, and other Princes, who all swore [31]Fealty by their Idols, and the Alcoran; and that Gonzalo Gomez admitted them, and swore to the Observance of what had been agreed on, in his Arguments for Spain. King’s Name, before an Image of the Blessed Virgin. He urg’d, that by Mathematical Demonstration, and the Judgment of Men learned in that Faculty, it appear’d, that the Moluccos were within the Limits of Castile, as were all others, as far as Malaca, and even beyond it. That it was no easy Undertaking for Portugal to go about to disprove the Writings of so many Cosmographers, and such able Mariners; and particularly the Opinion of Magellan, who was himself a Portuguese. And that in Case he might be thought partial, because of his being disoblig’d in Portugal, that Exception did not lie against Francis Serrano, who was also a Portuguese, and had been favour’d and cherish’d. That to say the Sea Charts had been maliciously contriv’d, was a groundless Objection, and not probable. Besides that, in Relation to the Article of Possession, on which the Controversy depended, it was only requisite to stand by what was writ by, and receiv’d among Cosmographers.

In Answer to this, King John of Portugal, deny’d the Fact of the Discovery, Portuguese Answer. as to its Precedency; for Serrano’s was in the Year 1511, and that of Magellans Companions nine Years later, in 1520. He declar’d the Globes, Astrolabes, and Sea Charts to be partial, and that in Case they were rectify’d, drawing the aforesaid Meridian, according to Rules of Astrology, his Limits would not only comprehend the Moluccos, but reach far beyond the Philippine Islands. He offer’d King Tabarija’s last Will on his Behalf; and said, that if the Line were fairly drawn, observing Eclipses, as had been done sometimes, the Truth of his Assertion would appear. To this they added, the Papers of the Geographer and Astrologer, Andrew de S. Martin, by which it appear’d, that he sailing with Magellan, his before unattempted Voyage, had observed several Eclipses, and Oppositions. Among the rest, on the 17th of December, 1519. He in the River call’d Rio de Janeyro, took an Observation of a Conjunction of Jupiter and the Moon; on the first of February 1520, another of the Moon and Venus; soon after another of the Sun and Moon, after passing the Streights, another Opposition of the Sun and Moon, and others at other times; all which, tho’ calculated by him to the Meridian of Sevil, avail’d nothing to his Design, which was to prove that the Molucco Islands did not belong to Portugal; for which Reason he found Fault with John de Monteregio’s Tables and Almanacks. All these Papers were preserv’d by Edward Resende Factor at the Moluccos, a learned and curious Man. They said, that since there was then a Treaty about the Possession of those Islands; in a Case of that Consequence it was not proper, to avoid alledging, and examining the Grounds of their Property, to prevent the Decision of the Sword, which was the Court where that Controversy was pleaded; and when once it comes to that pass, there was no Possibility of standing to speculative Writing, which not being made good by Experience, must at least be look’d upon as uncertain.

The Possession of the Molucco Islands was of great Consequence to the King of Portugal, for carrying on the Trade of Spice, and being inform’d of the War still maintain’d between his Subjects and the Emperor’s, in those Parts, he daily us’d fresh Endeavours to bring that Business to some Conclusion, that so the War might cease. The Emperor had not so [32]much Intelligence of what his Commanders did in Asia; because the Portuguese suffer’d no Ships, but their own to pass by the Cape of Good Hope; and the way of New-Spain, that Voyage was not much frequented, and therefore not so well known; and besides all this he then stood in need of a great Sum of Money. In the Year 1525, there was a Treaty at Segovia, The Difference adjusted. by his Majesties Order, for composing of this Difference, and in 1526 it was held at Sevil, where the Portuguese Embassador; and the Licenciate Azevedo of that Kings Council, were met by the Bishops of Osma, President of the Council of the Indies, Doctor Laurence Galindez, of the same Council, and Don Garcia de Padilla, first Commendary of Calatrava, on the Emperor’s side, as Commissioners, and Plenipotentaries, besides the Lord-High-Chancellor, and the Popes Nuncio, Mercurio Gatnara. After many Meetings, and much Strife, to which there were also Civilians, Geographers, and Mariners admitted; all which only puzzled the Cause, whence ensu’d Law Suits, Arbitrations, and other Fruitless Negociations in Spain, and Wars in Asia between the Ships of both Crowns: After all this there was a Cessation, and Quietness, the Emperor Mortgaging those controverted Islands to the King of Portugal, for 350000 Ducats. This was concluded at Zaragoza, on the 22d of August 1529, as his Imperial Majesty was going over to be Crown’d in Italy. The Line of Division was again examin’d, and what Parts of the Earth it is to run through; the Times of Payment were fix’d, with other Conditions, and Salvos of the Right on both sides, that so neither Oblivion, nor the Kindred between the two Kings might confound it.

By Relations Written in those Days it appears, that the Emperor consulting Spaniards against quitting the Moluccos. Peter Ruyz de Villegas, a grave and learned Gentleman, about this Mortgage; his Answer was condemning it, and declaring, That his Majesty had better to have Mortgaged any other of his Kingdoms, than that of the Moluccos, Trapobana, or Malaca, or any other in the East; all which, in his Opinion, belong’d to his Majesty; and the great uncertainty of State Affairs. Many others advised the Emperor to repay that great Sum to the King of Portugal; and what is yet more, the Representatives in the Cortes of Castile, propos’d that the Emperor should make over to them the Molucco Islands for six Years, by way of Farm, and they would pay King John the Mortgage Money, and bring the Trade of Spice to Coruna, and after the six Years his Majesty should carry on that Trade. The Emperor hearing of this Innovation, order’d a stop to it, and that no further Progress should be made in fitting out the Fleet design’d for the Moluccos, under Simon de Alcazova, and forwarded by the Bishop of Ciudad Rodrigo.

Orders, and Letters Patents, were drawn and sealed, for both Nations to forbear Hostilities, but the Emperor’s Subjects never receiv’d Commands from him to withdraw their Forces for any other Enterprize, nor did they War ceases between Spaniards and Portugueses. know what had been agreed on in Spain, any other way than by the Account they had from the Portugueses who had receiv’d Orders from their King, to conclude a Peace, and to Ship off the Spaniards by the way of India for Spain. This Agreement put an End to all Judicial, and Military Contention. Since then the Vicissitude of Times has invested all the Right, and Title in our King. So that, according to grave Civilians, he [33]might, as they say, invert the Titles, or possess by them all, without confounding the Right; Heaven having design’d him to be Sovereign of such a vast Monarchy, and given him that Hereditary Zeal, which makes him offer his whole Power to oppose Hereticks and Sectaries, and to spread the Faith, and its perfect Politicks among such Multitudes of Souls as have received it, in so many barbarous Provinces. For this same Reason it will be superfluous to examine any further into the Limits assign’d by that Law, which could never be settled.

This Accommodation being concluded, the Portuguese Fleets, without Portugueses Possession of the Moluccos. any Opposition from those of Castile, peaceably possess’d themselves of the Islands of Ternate, Tydore, Bachian, and the others about them. From the first of these, as their Head in Spirituals, our Priests went Abroad to preach the Word of Truth, which was receiv’d by several Kings and Nations, leaving but inconsiderable Remains of Idolatry, and other Sects. Whole Cities, whose Soveraigns chose to continue in their Darkness, not regarding their Prince’s Example, which uses to have the Force of a Law, threw down their Idols, and consecrated Profaneness, dedicating their Temples to the True God. The Kings of Portugal built Garrisons, and Factories for the Christians to inhabit; sending their Commanders and Officers, who curbed the Kings, and the Sangiacks their Subjects. Some Governours there were, who besides the Care they took of propagating Conversions. the Gospel, and maintaining Peace in those Parts, endeavour’d by endearing Means to attract the Barbarians to love our Habits, to affect our Ways of Entertainment, and the European Affability and Conversation, and gently inclin’d them to our Customs and Manners, which in some Places made them look upon that as a Sort of Equality, when it was no better than Servitude. The powerful Union of Justice and Religion was however the most prevalent; but the Commanders and Governours being defective in the first of these Virtues, on which inward Felicity and Government depend; the Subjects lost the second, and return’d to their former Blindness, as appears by what has been already said, and more fully by what is to follow, since we are now come to the Election of Sultan Aerio, in whose Days Ternate was utterly lost, and could never be recovered either by Force or Art, till the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King; a just Reward of his Piety and Zeal. The lawful Queen, by those People call’d Putriz, was as much concern’d for Aerio’s Mother’s Death, as for any of her own Sons. She was present at her Funeral, and lamenting immoderately, curs’d the Domination of the Portugueses, calling it Tyranny. All the Machinations of those who study’d Revenge were known to her, and she forwarded them with her Advice; for as they said, nothing now remain’d of the former Moderation of the Governours sent thither out of Europe, nor of that Regard and Respect they used to have for them.

The End of the First Book.

[34]

