---
heading: Book 10
linkTitle: Book 10
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---

Want of Political Reflections 

There is generally some Moral Instruction, which lies couch’d under the Actions of Men, and which Judicious Writers use to point at in the Relation of Events, as the Advantage of History; but what civil Rules, or Precepts for the forming of the Political Life, can we lay down, in writing the Conquest and Defence of Barbarous Countries, which all depends on Voyages, and reducing of Garrisons; notwithstanding State Craft has somewhat inform’d those Nations? 

Or what can occur in this Subject, which the Reader may not infer, as a necessary Consequence of the foregoing Discourse? Since then the Matter in Hand does not afford us such Reflection, let us draw to a Conclusion, in Pursuance of our Promise made at the Beginning.

Yloilo Port the Rendezvous of The Navy

Don Pedro de Acunna, now Captain General of the Fleet that was assembled in the Philippine Islands, at the same time took Care to see it fitted out with Expedition, and to provide for the Security of the Province he was to forsake, that he might go upon that so difficult Undertaking. Some there were, who look’d upon it as Part of Don Pedro’s good Fortune, that the Molucco Islands had been utterly lost, that since he had the more Matter to work upon, his Victory might be the more glorious. He most industriously provided all Things requisite for the Use of War; and even for all the Accidents it might be liable to. The Point, or Promontory of Yloilo runs out into the Sea, not far from Arevalo, in the Island of Panay, [239]forming a Harbour proper and capacious enough to be the Place of Arms, for the Preparations then in Hand. Here the Fleet rendezvous’d, consisting Particulars of the Fleet. of Six Tall Ships, Six Galleys, Three Galliots, like those they call Galizabras, belonging to the Crown of Portugal; in one of which was Peter Alvarez de Abreu, Commander in Chief of the Fort of Tydore; the other two, under the Command of John Rodriguez Camelo, Commodore, sent from Malaca, by the General Andrew Furtado de Mendoza, to be aiding with his Courage and Conduct, and to carry him an Account of the Success. One flat bottom’d Galliot, to land the Artillery, and in it 300 Baskets of Rice. Four Foists built purposely for carrying of Provisions. Two Champanes of Ten Tun Burden each, with 1600 Baskets of clean Rice. Two Dutch Long-Boats, which carry’d over the Portugueses when the Fort of Tydore was lost. Seven Frigats belonging to the King, and Seven more to private Persons, and the like Number of Champanes, in all 36 Sail.

The Land Forces. Colonel John de Esquivel brought 12 Companies of Spanish Foot; four whereof were rais’d in Andaluzia, being his own, and those of the Captains, Paul Garrucho, Peter Sevil, and Luke de Vergara Gaviria. Six came from New Spain, under the Captains Don Roderick de Mendoza, Son to Don John de Raeza y Castilla, and to Donna Maria de Mendoza, and by her Grandson to the Marquess de Montesclaros, and therefore, out of Respect to his Kinsman, the Viceroy of New Spain, he came out of Italy to serve his Majesty in the Philippine Islands; the others were Captain Pascual de Alarcon Pacheco, Martin de Esquivel, Bernardine Alfonso, Peter Delgado, and Stephen de Alcazar. Two other Companies commanded by the Captains John Guerra de Cervantes, and Christopher de Villagra, belong’d to the Forces of Manila, and the Province of the Pintados. All which, with 1423 Spaniards. their Officers, make up 1423 Spaniards. Under the Colonel Don Guillermo, and the Captains Don Francis Palaot, Don John Lit, Don Lewis and Augustin Lout, 344 Pampangua, and Tagalo Indians; besides 620 others of the same Nations, for the Sea and Land Service, and 649 Rowers. All the Men in the Fleet, besides the General’s Household and Family, amounted to 3095; with 75 Pieces of Cannon of all Sorts, and all other Perquisites for Sea, Landing, Fight, and Battery.

The Fleet sails from Yloilo. Don Pedro sail’d from the Port of Yloilo, with all these Preparations, on the 15th of January, 1606, the Weather being unsettled, but he as resolute as at other Times. He arriv’d at the Island Mindanao, then in Enmity with the Spaniards, and in Confederacy with the Ternates, and came to Caldera Port. an Anchor in the Port of Caldera, to water, where the Admiral’s Ship, in which the Colonel Esquivel was, began to drag her Anchors, and was forc’d to set her Sails to get off; but perceiving she could not, by so doing weather a Point, she fired two Guns, in Token of Distress, at the Time Admiral Ship lost. when her Rudder struck. The Galleys made up to tow her off, and broke some Ropes to no Purpose, the Sea and Wind being against them. Captain Villagra was entrusted to save the Men and Provisions that were aboard; and he, tho’ a considerable Part belonging to the King and private Men was lost, with incredible Industry sav’d the most of them, and the Goods, as also all the Men, Cannon, Powder, Cables, Rigging, and Sails; and that the People of Mindanao might not reap the Benefit of the Wreck, he [240]set Fire to the Vessel, after taking out all the Iron Work. This Accident was much lamented, both for its own Consequence, and because the Men, who are often vainly Superstitious, put an ill Construction upon it; but the General’s Wisdom made amends for all.

They sail from Caldera. From the Port of Caldera, the General order’d the Colonel to sail over to that of Talangame, which, as has been said, is in the Island of Ternate; and bore him Company himself, with the Galleys, till he was out of the Streight of Sabuanga, which is dangerous by Reason of the Currents and Ridges of Rocks, wherefore they tow’d the Ships, till they were out of Danger, as also because they were becalm’d. The Fleet stood out to Sea; the Galleys coasted along slowly to take in Water enough to last them to Ternate, the Men that had been sav’d from abroad the Admiral being distributed among them, and the other Vessels, so that their Burden and Labour Through Mistake fall in with Celebes. was increased. The ablest pilots in those Seas, had Charge of the Galleys, and yet notwithstanding all their Care, and that of the Captains and expert Mariners, they mistook their Course, and fell in among the islands of Celebes, otherwise call’d of Mateo, above 60 Leagues to the Leeward of Ternate. The Wind was contrary, and the Error was to be Arrive at Ternate. retriev’d by rowing. With very much Labour they reach’d Ternate on the 26th of March, being Easter-Day. That Day so joyful to all Mankind, made them forget past Toils, and convert them into Pleasure and Delight.

Superstition of Moluccos as to Eclipses. They were inform’d, that the Day before, an Eclipse of the Moon had been observ’d at Ternate, with the usual Concern. No sooner does the Darkness begin to cover the Body of the Moon, than the People with Sighs and Tears begin also to lament that Planet’s Mourning; for they believe it forebodes the Death or Captivity of their King, or of some eminent Person or some Calamity to the Publick. If the Eclipse passes over without any of these Losses, they Repair to their Mosque in Procession, Rank and File. Here the foremost carry large China Dishes. Those are follow’d by others with Launces, and Hatchets advanc’d, and Muskets rested. Next them follow three Lamps, carry’d on Men’s Shoulders, as common Pictures represent the great Bunch of Grapes carry’d by the Discoverers, who went to view the Holy Land promis’d by God to his People. Next comes a Boy, in Royal Robes, and behind him another holding an Umbrello, made of various Feathers, over the Head of the first. Then follow the Women, set off with Flowers and Palm-Branches, without Order; and thus they celebrate their Thanksgiving, in the Streets and Temples, because the Eclipse pass’d over without any Detriment. The Dutch told them, That Eclipses were commonly known in their Country, and throughout all Europe; which those People either admir’d or did not believe.

When our Galleys came to the Port of Talangame, Don Pedro expected to have found the Colonel with the Fleet in it; but only saw a stately Dutch Ship at Talangame. Dutch Ship, carrying 30 Pieces of Cannon, and 12 Pedreroes. She fought our Ships as they pass’d by, and then drew to the Shore, and defended herself with Part of the Artillery, that was fittest for the Purpose, and being guarded by a great Number of Ternate Soldiers, kept close in her Fortification. Don Pedro took a View of her, as he pass’d by in the Galleys, tho’ she made several Shot at him, and threw 18 Pound Balls into the Admiral [241]Galley, where he was. He thought fit not to stay, till he heard of the Fleet which was then at Tydore, little above two Leagues from that Port, as was known by some Vessels of the Natives, that came up board and board, in sailing by that Harbour. The Galleys directed their Course to Tydore, led by the Joy of this good News, which eas’d Don Pedro of much Care he was in, knowing there was a Scarcity of Seamen aboard the Fleet, and he fear’d it might have been drove away elsewhere.

Dutch Men at Tydore. Esquivel found four Dutch Men at Tydore. One of them was the Factor who gather’d the Clove for a Company of his Countrymen, that belong’d to the Factories of Ternate, Amboyna, Banda, Sunda, and other Places about them; the other three were Sailers. He examin’d all four, and they gave an Account of the Strength of that Ship, and her Guns, saying, She was loden with Clove; and one of the five that fought the Portugueses, when the Fort of Ternate blew up. That they expected another Ship, which came Intelligence they give. with her from Bantam, and was parted in foul Weather. That the main Drift of the Agreement made between the King of Ternate and the Dutch, was their Assisting him against the Spaniards, and Portugueses. That there were Orders at Java and Sunda for the Dutch Ships which pass’d by to enquire there, whether there were any News from the Moluccos; and if Need were, that they should leave their Loding there, and go succour the King of Ternate.

Ternate to be attack’d before the Dutch Ship. Before Don Pedro departed Talangame, he consulted with his Officers, whether it were convenient to attack the Dutch Ship before they went upon the Enterprize of Ternate. Opinions varied, but it was concluded, that since his Majesties Design was to recover the Maluccos, and he had order’d the Fleet to be provided for that Intent, it was not expedient to prefer any other Action. Time is subject to change, and sometimes an Accident overthrows the best concerted Designs. That great Ship, so well stor’d with Guns, and Mann’d, might have sunk some of ours, by which we should have lost our Cannon, and Provisions, or some other Mischief, that could not possibly be foreseen might have happen’d, to the obstructing of the main Design. Besides that the Ternates being their Friends, in Case we had master’d the Ship, the Men might fly and save themselves among their Confederates, and thus the Enterprize be rendered more difficult by their Assistance; and it was known by Spyes, that the King already had Dutch Gunners, and Soldiers of Courage and Conduct.

King of Tydore and Don Pedro meet at Sea. The King was not at Tydore when our Fleet came into his Harbour, being gone to marry a Daughter of the King of Bachian; and tho’ the Colonel sent to acquaint him with his Arrival, and to desire he would hasten his Coming, as fearing Delays; yet perceiving the Time slipt away, he set out on the last of March for Ternate, with his Fleet. When they were at Sea, they heard the new marryed King’s Bagpipes, Basons, Trumpets, and Kettle-Drums. He having receiv’d the Spaniards Letters, imbark’d, bringing the New Queen along with him, and joyn’d them with his Carcoas full of Musick and Garlands of Flowers. They met with extraordinary Joy, and the King of Tydore express’d it particularly for seeing of Don Pedro de Accunna, with whom he had before frequent Communication by Letters and Messengers. He show’d much Concern for the Streights he had been reduc’d to by the King of Ternate, with the Assistance of the Dutch. Don [242]Pedro comforted him, declaring his Majesty’s Intention, and how he had order’d him to come to his Assistance, from the Philippine Islands, whensoever he should require it. He visited the Bride, paying her all possible Respect; and the King of Tydore, telling him, he would attend the Fleet in Person, with his Ships and Men, went away then to his Island, and the next Morning, at Break of Day, according to his Promise, came into a Bay near Orders for the Enterprize. Ternate, where our Fleet had anchor’d. The Rejoycings for his coming did not delay the Consultations, and Orders for the Enterprize. The Governour call’d a Council of War, where it was resolv’d, that all the Strength of the Fleet should be reduc’d to only three great Ships, to secure the Sea and Land. They were immediately sufficiently mann’d with Sea-Men and Soldiers, under the Command of Bernardine Alfonso, Antony Carrenno de Valdes, and Don Gil Sanchez de Carranza, all three Commanders of Repute. Other Orders were issu’d out, and presently put in Execution by the Officers. Of the three above nam’d, two dy’d in their Return Home, and only Carreno out liv’d it.

The Forces land April the first. Don Pedro, and the King of Tydore landed their Men, on the first of April, at Break of Day; but it being difficult, and even dangerous to march so near the Water, because there was no more ground on the Shore than for five Men in Rank; it was resolv’d to make the Attack with a small Number, gradually along the Sea Coast, without ingaging too far; and at the same Time to make Way over the Top of the Mountain, with some Pampanguo, and Tangalo Indian Pioneers, and to send another Party of Men that Way, to give the Enemy a Diversion, and oblige them to divide their Forces. The King of Ternate, whom Experience and Fear had instructed in the Art of War, perceiving what was aim’d at, to avoid being cut off in K. of Ternate retires to his Fort. the Rear, retir’d to his Fort, as soon as he discover’d our Army. This was the Reason why our Men met with no Opposition, whereas the General Furtado found so much Resistance there, three Years before, at the Seige we have spoken of, when in gaining that Pass, he lost some Portugueses and Spaniards, being assisted by Captain Gallinato.

Gallinato invests the Place. He now put our Men into good Order, leading the Van, and drew up within Musket Shot of the Wall. He told Don Pedro, in the Presence of the King of Tydore, that some Soldiers had, by his Command, taken a View of the Place, and that considering the Nature of the Situation, it was requisite to maintain that Ground till Night, when our Men should intrench, and bring up the Cannon for Battery. His Advice was approv’d of, and put in Execution; and in Regard that the Enemy did some Harm in the main Body, and Wings, with their Cannon and small Shot; Don Pedro to prevent it, order’d the Men to lye down. It was observ’d that there were Sentinels on Trees beaten off. four Eminences cover’d with wild, and full headed Trees, on which the Enemy had their Sentinels, who gave Intelligence how the Spaniards mov’d, and of whatsoever they order’d, or perform’d. A Captain went up to make himself Master of the Trees, and soon brought down the Enemies Sentinels. Gallinato perfected that Work, commanding our Sentinels to get up into those same Trees, as was done. The Enemy endeavour’d to remove them with their Cannon and small Arms, firing incessantly; but could never disturb either those that were on the Top, among the Boughs, who gave the Information, not the others that stood at the Foot, who receiv’d and carryed [243]it to the Officers. The Enemy was possess’d of a Post near the Bastion of Cachil Tulo, on the right Hand of the Wall, a little beyond the Trees, and the General thinking it necessary to be gain’d, commanded Captain John de Cubas, an old Low-Country Soldier, to attack it with 30 Musketiers, and if he thought himself too hard set, to send Word, and he should have a good Supply of Pikes. The Captain went on by the Way of the Mountain, and the Enemy to prevent him, sent a Body of Men out of the Fort next the Sea, whom Captain Villagra charg’d. Whilst they were ingag’d, the King of Ternate, perceiv’d that Cubas was marching to gain his Post, and Villagra and Cubas fight the Ternates. being sensible how prejudicial the Loss of it would be, sally’d out himself to fight him, and the Spaniards had enough to do. Cubas gained the highest Ridge; but so fatigued, that he was forc’d to send for the Supply of Pikes. The Captains Vergara, Alarcon, and Don Roderick de Mendoza supported him with 40 detatch’d Men; and before they came up more Ternates and Javaneses sally’d out of the Fort, with whom the fight was renew’d in more furious Manner. Another Party of Infidels was presently discover’d next the Sea, for which Reason, and because, if the Enemy had demanded more Succours, his Posts would be forsaken, the King order’d those who fought with Villagra to retire, and went himself with them, and some others to sustain the Rest. His coming on like a brave, or rather a desperate The Fight redoubl’d. Commander, oblig’d Cubas, to ask for another Supply which the Captains Villagra, and Cervantes carry’d him, and charg’d the Enemy. Cachil Amuxa, of whose Bravery Mention has been made, went up to Captain Cubas after burning the Brims of his Hat, and the Feather in it, with a Musket Shot, and they both fought Hand to Hand for a considerable Time, the one with his Sword, and the other with his Campilane, or Cymiter. The Single Combat. Sentinels on the Trees cry’d out, giving Notice of the Troops on the Shore, and that they came on towards our Van-Guard, and the Front of it. Captain Villagra was order’d to charge them with a Division of Shot, belonging to Captain Cervantes, who commanded all the Halbardiers. Both Parties fought with equal Tokens of Courage, when the Sentinels from the Trees gave Notice, that John de Cubas, on the Right, demanded more Succours. The Captains Don Roderick de Mendoza, and Pascual de Alarcon went with it immediately, drawing out two Divisions of Musketiers. The Sentinels cry’d out again, that the Enemy, who fought with Captain Villagra were retiring towards the Walls, and that John de Cubas demanded another Supply of Pikes and Halbards. Captain Cervantes supported him with 50, and Villagra, with the Men he commanded.

Ternates retire in Disorder. Our Sentinels, to whose Vigilancy a great Part of this Success is owing, gave Notice again, that upon the Approach of our Supplies, the Enemy retired in Disorder, and our Men made up to the Wall. The Event of the Battle began now to be out of Doubt, and even in that Posture requir’d Diversity of Conduct. Don Pedro therefore order’d the Colours with the Rest of the Pikes to march, leaving one Division of Musquetiers, and the Heavy Harquebussiers in the Rear, to face the Enemy, in Case they should happen to sally out again toward the Sea. The other Captains and Soldiers went on fighting, and at the set Time attack’d the Wall, helping one another to climb to the Top. The two first that got upon it were the Captains John de Cubas, and Cervantes, who having receiv’d some Wounds on it, tumbled [244]down again. The Difficulty of this Enterprize increas’d as the Enemy renew’d their Efforts, doing us Harm with their heavy and small Cannon, Muskets, sundry Sort of Fireworks, Stones, and other Contrivances the Dutch furnish’d them with; but the Attack was made so furiously, that the Spaniards gave not the King, nor his Men Leisure enough to get into the old Portuguese Fort, within the Wall; for had they done so, they might have defended themselves some Time, and our Men would have been oblig’d to batter the Walls with Cannon; and tho’ the Fort is small, and built in more unskilful Times, it would have cost Trouble.

The Place was taken with little Loss, for we had but Fifteen Men kill’d on our Side, among them was Captain Cervantes, who getting up the first The Place taken, and Number of the Slain. upon the Wall, with a Design to display the King’s Standard on it, was run into the Eye with a Launce, by a Barbarian, and others coming on, they threw him down to the Ground, whereof he dy’d the seventh Day, much regretted by all Men. He had before said publickly, offering to give the Charge, Gentlemen, the Bull shall not make his Escape my Way, unless it cost me my Life; alluding to keeping of him in at the Bull-Feasts. He was as good as his Word both ways, since he dy’d in Performance of it, with his Arms and Legs broken. No Man of any Note, either among the Spaniards or Indians escap’d unhurt. Many Ternates and Javaneses were slain, and some Dutch shed their Blood, like brave or desperate Men, thinking it a Misfortune, as they said, to owe their Lives to our Courtesy, or Mercy.

It was never expected that the Success, would be in all Points answerable to the Justice of the Cause. Don Pedro had design’d to batter the Forts, wherein he would have met with mighty Difficulties, because the Cannon was very heavy, and hard to be drawn to the proper Posts for Battery; as also for that there was not Earth to fill the Gabions, and the Cannon found in it. Rockiness of the Ground obstructed the throwing up of the Trenches, which would have occasion’d the Loss of many Men before the Artillery could be planted. The Spaniards pursu’d their Success, and possessing themselves of the Fort, found in it 43 large Brass Guns, abundance of Drakes, and other Arms, besides Ammunition and Provisions.

The Men having enter’d the City, every one fell to plunder, and commit Prisoners made Slaves. Outrages. Don Pedro had made Proclamation, that all the Enemies taken within four Days should be made Slaves. The Commanders halted near the ancient Church of S. Paul, which was fortify’d by the Enemy with Ramparts for this Service. Opinions vary’d about what was next to be done; Some were for securing what was already gain’d; Others for pushing on, to gain the main Fort. The Captains Vergara and Villagra, went for the Latter, and the Soldiers were so brisk and eager to run into any Danger, that one of them, of the Province of Estremadura, and belonging Eagerness of the Men. to the Company of Captain Sevil, an Aragonian, and notable Commander, who was also for going on, took up Captain Villagra in his Arms, and carry’d him above ten Paces, saying, Good Captain, fall on, fall on; and then set him down. The Captain struck him, for having They attack and take the main Fort. taken him up so rudely, at such a Time; and the Soldier bowing, pleasantly and with a smiling Countenance, said to him, God is my Life, strike again, and fall on. In short, Vergara and Villagra, with a few Men attack’d [245]the main Fort, and carry’d it, being themselves the first that enter’d They attack and take the main Fort. the Gates, but not the first that went up; for as they were running up the Stairs hastily, and just going into the Hall, Barela, an old Soldier, and Corporal to Captain Cervantes, thrust by their Side, and getting in, took a gilt Ewre, made in the Shape of an Urn, curiously ingrav’d, from off a rich Cupboard, or Side-board there was in the Hall, saying to the Captains, The King’s Palace plunder’d. Gentlemen, I take this in Token that I came in here with you; and carry’d it away, by their Consent. All the Palace was then expos’d to the Avarice of the Soldiers. Don Pedro would have given a check to it; but was not taken Notice of, till almost all was over.

The King of Ternate had forsaken all, and some of the Dutch him, when The King &c. fly, to Gilolo. they saw he was going down; none follow’d him in this Confusion and Flight, but the Sangiack of Mofaquia, his Kinsman, who encourag’d and advis’d him, his Queen Celicaya, and some other Women. He embark’d with them all, Prince Gariolano his Son, and a few Dutch, in great Haste, within the Wall, aboard some Carcoas of Mofaquia, and plying the Oars, or rather Flying, arriv’d in the Island of Gilolo, at a Fort there, built not long before in Sabugu. The rest of the Dutch got off in other Vessels to their Ship.

The whole Body of the Army now rang’d the Towns and Houses of the The Dutch to their Ship. Natives, wholly intent upon Plunder, and Don Pedro went about, giving Orders, and checking the Soldiers, that they might keep in a Body.

The General went on to S. Paul’s Church, which was unroof’d and profan’d; he order’d it to be cleans’d, and immediately adorn’d with Possession taken of the Fort. Boughs, and other Ornaments, brought thither by the diligent Soldiers, where they devoutly, with loud Voices, sang the Hymn, Salve Regina, which our Church uses to call upon the blessed Virgin. For the compleating of this Victory, they still wanted to seize the King, Prince, Sangiacks, and Commanders that follow’d him. The General took Possession of the Forts, setting up and displaying the Colours, with the Arms of the Crown of Spain, and the Name of PHILIP THE THIRD, OUR SOVEREIGN, the Musick playing, and Guns firing. He order’d, King of Ternate pursu’d. that the next Day Captain Villagra should set out in Pursuit of the King of Ternate, with 100 Men in two Galleys, and the King of Tydore, and the Prince his Son, with their Fleet, consisting of two Janguas, and 15 Carcoas, in which were 1000 Men.

The King and Prince of Tydore, with Captain Villagra, came to the Tacome Fort surrender’d to Villagra. Fort of Tacome, in Ternate, on the third of April, where they found Cachil Amuxa, the bravest of the Natives of Ternate, Cousin German to their King, and his Captain General. Villagra sent him a Message by Antony de Silva, Interpreter of their Language, and through his Means he surrendred, with some Dutch; all whom he carry’d Prisoners to the City. He brought them in very honourable Manner, and they had not the dejected Looks of Men that were overcome. Being come to the City, he deliver’d them to Don Pedro de Acunna, who observing the same Generosity, received and treated them courteously, and commended their Valour. There the Cachil and Captain John de Cubas knew one another again, remember’d the Wounds they had given and receiv’d, and were good Friends. The Portuguese Commanders visited him, and in his Presence, after commending [246]the Bravery they had shown in the War, the General, with his The General honours the Portuguese Commanders. own Hands, put weighty Gold Chains about their Necks, as was then us’d among Soldiers, desiring they would accept of that Acknowledgement of their gallant Behaviour, and excuse the Smallness of the Gift; and they on their Side, made suitable Returns of Courtesy.

Villagra went out again, and by the Way, took the Sangiack of Mofaquia, and two of his Nephews, without any Opposition. All these having desir’d Audience of Don Pedro, told him, they had always been desirous to Sangiack of Mofaquia taken. return to their Subjection under his Majesty, but that their Kinsman, the King, had obstructed it, and ruin’d himself by adhereing to his own Opinion, rejecting the safest and best, which was to recover their former Favour. This Pride, said they, has reduc’d him to the miserable Condition he He proposes to bring over the King. is now in. If you please we will discourse, and perswade him to put himself into your Hands, after you have taken such Security of us as becomes conquer’d Men, and given Commission to such as you can confide in to Article with the King. It is not the Change of our Fortune that moves us to this, for none can daunt those who are prepar’d for the worst; but it is that Fidelity, which the Circumstances of the Times would not permit us to exert. Don Pedro’s Answer. Don Pedro return’d Thanks for their Zeal, and told them, The Method they had chosen was the best to oblige the King of Spain to use that Victory with his innate royal Goodness; and therefore empower’d them to assure the King, and his Son, that their Lives should be safe. The two Cachiles embarking with Paul de Lima, who, tho’ a Native of Ternate, was discreet and a Master of the Spanish Tongue, as also well known to the King, and with Captain Villagra, they sail’d over together to the Fort of Sabubu, in the Island Batochina. The King embrac’d, and receiv’d them with Tears; but when they propos’d his surrend’ring himself, he would The King delivers himself up on a safe Conduct. not consent without a formal safe Conduct first granted. That Satisfaction was soon given him, for Don Pedro sent it, with Assurance of his Life, in respectful Terms, becoming the Person of a King, and all solid and safe, according to the Power committed to him, the Rest being left at his Catholick Majesty’s Disposal.

Embarks for Ternate. The Instrument, which the General had drawn in Form, being read, the King resolv’d to repair to Ternate, with the Prince, and the other Cachiles and Sangiacks; yet contrary to the Advice of Celicaya, of whom he was always desperately in Love. In fine, he put himself into the Hands of Don Pedro, and to this Effect embark’d on three Janguas, and meeting with Villagra, they went over with all the rest into his Galleys, to be carry’d to the General. The King desir’d by the Way to visit his Mother, who was in the Fort of Tacome, and having propos’d it to Captain Villagra, he comply’d with him, and the Galleys made haste. They came to Tacome on the 8th of April, where he landed, and his Mother coming out to meet him, encourag’d him, without showing the least Dejectedness. Visits his Mother. Nothing appear’d in the Discourse between them that could be heard, that had a Womanish Air, or the Resemblance of a Motherly Tenderness, as the Interpreters declar’d, nor did she comfort him with Hopes of Revenge, but only with Reasons perswading to sute himself to his Fortune, which is the Will of Heaven. [247]

From this Place Villagra sent Advice to Don Pedro, that the King was come, and would soon be with him. He having receiv’d the News, sent The King brought to Ternate. Major Ascueta to bid him welcome. He order’d he should be treated with Respect, and that the Major should in secret bid Captain Villagra make haste to Ternate, because there was much still to do, and it was not proper to lose Time. The Progress of Victory is not to be interrupted. They set out in the Evening for Ternate, where they arriv’d late at Night, and therefore went not into the City. The King stood as it were amaz’d when he saw the Place, and heard the Drums, and other Martial Noises; being sensible of the Yoke he had been so averse to bear. However he diverted The King of Tydore goes to visit him. himself that Night, as a sick Person uses to admit of the Entertainment he receives from those who are in Health. The next Day the General came aboard, whilst the Army was forming into one great Body, and the Companies were marching, that the King might not stay; that Show being provided for him, and the Design that he should be conducted in through the Midst of the Forces. Don Pedro order’d, That before he landed, the King of Tydore, who attended in the same Harbour, should go visit him. He refus’d to receive him, as long as he could, and the Colonel and all the Captains intreated him to admit of the Visit, which he at length consented to, either being perswaded, or yielding to Importunity. The Galley made towards the King of Tydore’s Fleet, and as they drew near, the Cannon fir’d. The King of Tydore stay’d aboard his Admiral, conceal’d between Curtains of Crimson Damask, and when the two Galleys Barbarous Ceremonies of the Kings. were come together board and board, after a long Silence, the Curtains were drawn. Both the Kings appear’d in their Vessels, looking at one another, for a considerable Time, without speaking a Word. At length he of Ternate, as the conquer’d, call’d to one of his Nephews, to whom kneeling, he deliver’d a Message in his Ear for the King of Tydore. The Nephew Zumbaya Ceremony. went over to the Carcoa, and having made the Zumbaya, according to their Ceremonies, with great Tokens of Submission, kneeling, joyning his Hands, and raising them up to his Face, kiss’d the King of Tydore’s left Foot. Then he deliver’d him his Message with much Deliberation, all the Standers-by observing the knitting of his Brows, and all the other Tokens of Admiration and Sorrow, wherewith he was heard. The Nephew withdrew as soon as he had done speaking; and after the King of Tydore had continu’d a while Thoughtful, he call’d another Cachil, who was his Favourite, and Kinsman. He spoke to him in the same Manner, and gave him another Message for the King of Ternate, with much Deliberation and State. This Messenger paid him the same respectful Ceremonies, and going over to our Galley, when he came into the Presence of the King of Ternate, after performing the same Zumbaya, bow’d himself down, and deliver’d the Answer. The King receiv’d it with as much Grandeur as he could have done had he been Conqueror. Then he also stood a while musing, and rising went over to the Admiral of Tydore, which, as has been Meeting of the two Kings. said, was grappled with the Galley. The Prince, his Son, and the Commanders attended him. The King of Tydore stood up to receive him. When they met, each of them us’d tedious Civilities, and Ceremonies towards the other, about sitting. He of Ternate sat first, and the Prince, by his Father’s Order, paid him of Tydore, the Respect of the Zumbaya, [248]kissing his Foot. He to prevent obliging his Son to repay the like Compliment to the other, before the King of Ternate came, had order’d him aboard another Vessel, and to put out to Sea, that he might not be present at the Interview. The two Kings discours’d about several Affairs, and he of Ternate, of his Misfortune, tho’ in manly Manner.

The two Kings land. It being now Time for the King of Ternate to land, both the Kings began to draw near it, but with different Notions. The General waited in the Fort, and saw the Landing from the Top of it. The King of Ternate came ashore between and led by the Colonel, and Gallinato. After him follow’d the Prince, conducted by Captain Villagra, and the Major. The King march’d thro’ a Lane of our Foot, and seem’d pleas’d to see them so gallant, and orderly. Thus he came to the Fort, the ancient Residence of his Predecessors, and not long since his own, Don Pedro, the Governour coming down to the Gate to meet him, unarm’d, richly dress’d, and with Don Pedro receives the King. such Decency as became his Person. He would have kiss’d his Hand, but the King embrac’d him, and they went up Hand in Hand to the Lodgings; in the Stateliest whereof, they found three Chairs, with as many Cushions before them, plac’d on a rich Carpet under the Canopy. The King sat on that in the Middle, the Prince on the next, and the Governour on the third. After a short Silence, the Discourse began, Don Pedro telling the King, his Highness ought to bear his present Condition with Resolution, remembering the long Prosperity he had enjoy’d. That he offer’d to interceed, Comforts him. and use his Interest with his Majesty, that he might be restor’d to his Kingdoms; and that the Subject in Hand requiring longer and private Conferences, he for the Present would cut it short, because the settling of weighty Affairs, is not to be grounded on the Noise of Promises. The King’s Answer. The King return’d Thanks for the Kindness he show’d, in promising his Restitution, and bewailing his present Condition, concluded, saying, That he took Comfort in him, considering Heaven had reserv’d him to be subdu’d by so great a Commander; in which particular he reckon’d he was much oblig’d to his Fortune; and that he confided, he would treat him with such Generosity and Goodness as was due on his own Account, and his being the Minister of so great a Monarch, without calling to mind that his own Pride had been his Ruin. The Governour satisfy’d him as to all Points, and having order’d the best House in Ternate to be furnish’d, and A Spanish Company guards the King. sent to it Plate, Household Goods, Linnen, Beds, Pavillions, and all Things answerable to such a Guest, he desir’d the King would be pleas’d to remove thither, and with his leave he would wait on him; and that, with his good liking, a Spanish Captain with his Company should guard his Person; lest the Subjects of the Kingdom of Tydore, his natural Enemies, who were then very Numerous in the City, seeing him alone, should offer any Rudeness. The King accepted of it, smiling in a heavy Manner, to signify that the Guard was appointed to secure him, and all the other Prisoners, and that he was sensible of the false Gloss they gave it.

He desires the Company of Captain Villagra. Captain Peter Delgado was order’d with his Company to guard the King’s House, and attend him, till reliev’d. That Night the King was very melancholy, being among so many Strangers, and though it was late, would not go to Bed, till he had sent Sylva, the Portuguese Interpreter, to desire the General, that for some Comfort in his Solitude, this being the [249]Request of a conquer’d Person, he would send him Captain Villagra, whom, as the first Spaniard he had been acquainted with, he lov’d, call’d him Father and delighted in his Company. The King is reported to have said, that to converse with the Conquerors, is only to hasten being overcome, and make the Change of Fortune Habitual. The Governour was glad he could afford him that Satisfaction; and sending immediately for Captain Villagra, desir’d he would go divert the King, and make much of, and entertain him with Art, that he might be comforted. The Captain readily comply’d, and the King express’d singular Satisfaction in his Company. He supp’d, and went to Bed, discoursing all the while with the Captain concerning Martial and Religious Affairs.

Two Days after the Governour directed Colonel Gallinato and Captain Villagra, together with Paul de Lima, to propose to the King to enter into Treaty with him, in his Majesty’s Name, for settling Things in a State of Security, and Safety; and to perswade him, that was the Way to deserve Treaty set afoot with the King. well, and put himself into a better Condition. They three went to him, attended by other Persons of Note, and among them some religious Men of the Orders of S. Augustin, and S. Dominick, and the Society of Jesus, who all behav’d themselves commendably in their Stations. The King did not refuse to capitulate, and after settling the Form, by the Interposition of Paul de Lima, and granting some Things he desir’d of the King of Spain, the following Articles were drawn and sign’d.

Articles between the General and King of Ternate. The King to deliver up all Forts. The first Thing requir’d of Cachil Sultan Zayde, King of Ternate, and of the rest who are Prisoners with his Highness, is that he shall deliver up to his Majesty King Philip our Sovereign, the Forts he is now possess’d of, being those of Gilolo, Sabubu, Gamocanora, Tacome, those of Machian, those of Sula, and the Rest. To this he answers, that he will deliver up to his Majesty the aforesaid Forts, and to that Effect, will send the Prince his Son, and His Kinsman Cachil Amuxa, with the Persons appointed to take Possession of them, and that they shall be deliver’d up, with all the Cannon, Ammunitions, Muskets, and Fire-Arms there are in them.

To release Prisoners. Secondly, That he shall restore all the Prisoners he has, either Christians, or Infidels, being our Subjects, as well of the Provinces of the Pintados, as of the Rest that are subject to the Spaniards in the Philippine Islands. He answer’d, that all such as can be found at present shall be deliver’d, and the Rest hereafter as they are discover’d.

To deliver up the Dutch. Thirdly, That he shall deliver up the Dutch he has in his Power. He answer’d, That when he departed the Fort of Ternate, 13 or 14 that were with him fled; and he supposes they repair’d to the Dutch Ship, because he has not seen them since; but if they shall be found, he will deliver them immediately.

And Renegado Spaniards. Fourthly, He shall deliver up the Renegado Spaniards that were in the Fort of Ternate. He answer’d, that there was but one, and he fled as well as the Rest the Day the Fort was taken; that he knows not where he is, but will cause Search to be made, and deliver him.

Also Batochina, Moratay, & Herrao. Fifthly, That he shall deliver up all the Towns which are in Batochina, and is call’d El Moro, they having been formerly Christians; as also the Islands of Moratay, and Herrao, which were also Christian, with all the Artillery and Ammunition there is in them. He answer’d, he is ready to deliver up all, as he had done his Person. [250]

The Form of rendering the Capitulation authentick. These Articles Don Pedro de Acunna, Governour, and Captain General of the Philippine Islands, President of the Royal Court residing in them, and General of this Fleet in the Moluccos, committed to the General John Xuarez Gallinato, and to Captain Christopher de Villagra, who concluded them in the Form as above, by the Interposition of Paul de Lima, a Portuguese born in these Islands, who serv’d as Interpreter of the Languages. And the said King subscrib’d his Name, after his Manner. Given in the Fort of Ternate, on the tenth of April, 1606. The said General, and Captain also sign’d it with the said Paul de Lima.

How it was sign’d. The King sign’d in Persian Characters, with graceful Flourishes, and the Spaniards plainly; and this Original Capitulation was brought into Spain, with the other authentick Instruments.

Commanders go to take Possession. In Pursuance to this Agreement, the Commanders imbark’d to take Possession of the several Places, carrying along with them the King and Prince, and other Prisoners in two Galleys being the Admiral, and Vice-Admiral, with all Villagra’s Company, and Part of that of Cervantes. The first Place taken Possession of was the Fort of Tacome, next that of Sula, both in the Island of Ternate. Thence they sail’d to the great Batochina, where are those of Gilolo, formerly a flourishing Kingdom; of Sabubu, and Gamocanora, Gamocanora what it signifies. which we corruptly call Gran Bocanora; but in that Country Language, Gamo signifies Middle, and Canora Land, so that Gamocanora, altogether signifies, Mid-Land, because it lies in the midst of Gilolo, and El Moro. Possession was taken of all these Forts, none landing but Villagra, with Cachil Amuxa, Antony de Sylva, and John de Vega, who did the Part of a Notary, being appointed, and authoriz’d for that Time. The Cachil assembled the People at all the Forts, acquainted them with the Success of Ternate, and that all was now subject to the Spaniards, by whose Authority that Captain Manner of taking Possession. came to take Possession, that so all might pay their Obedience to his Majesty. The People having been attentive to what was propos’d to them, knelt down, and raising their voices made the Zumbaya. Then the Captain display’d the Standard advancing it in his Majesty’s Name, to denote Possession. Then he commanded the Natives to bring out the Cannon, and draw it down to the Shore, to be imbark’d aboard the Galleys. This was the Method observed at Gilolo, and in other Places of less Note.

K. of Tydore recovers his Towns. In the mean while, the King of Tydore, making his Advantage of the Victory, sent the Prince his Son with some Troops, to possess himself of the Towns the King of Ternate had taken for him, as he actually did. Don Pedro being inform’d of it, was offended that an Enterprize should be undertaken without his Order, and thinking the King of Tydore had therein given Tokens of Distrust, and Disrespect, had Thoughts of taking such Satisfaction, as he judg’d the Matter deserv’d; but the King of Tydore reflecting on his Misbehaviour, and that the Governours Resentment swell’d up to absolute Indignation, he found Means to appease him, excusing himself, and saying, that Invasion had been carry’d on without his Order, or Knowledge; and desisting expected to be restor’d by Don Pedro, as we shall soon see.

The Method observ’d at other Forts, could not be followed at that of Sabubu, where Queen Celycaya was, because Cachil Amuxa fell sick, or pretended so to do. Villagra had Regard to the Circumstances of Times. Cachil Rete, Sangiack of Gamocanora, the King’s Nephew, and a brave Soldier, [251]The People of Sabubu in Arms. landed instead of the other. The People of that Town imagin’d, that Villagra brought considerable Forces, and therefore to secure the Queen, and themselves, they gather’d above 2500 fighting Men, under Pretence they would not suffer Celycaya to be taken away. They hid themselves with their Arms, yet not so but that the Captain knew of it. He took no Notice, but coming up to one of the Bastions of the Town, which were both next the River, drew off the Cannon, some few of the Natives, and those Boys helping him; the Rest waiting for more considerable Action, in Arms. Then he disarm’d the other Bastion, assisted by Francis Romanico, and John Rodriguez Bermejo, Captains of the Galleys. The Town stands on the Bank of a River, up which they had run in their Boats; but returning with the Cachil Rete. Men that row’d, the Guns were loaded, the Sangiack Rete forwarding of it. He finding the People in an Uproar, would not have had the Cannon carry’d away, at that Time. Possession was not taken till afterwards, out of Respect to the Queen, and by Reason of the Mutiny of the People, who escap’d not unchastis’d. The Galleys return’d to Gamocanora, and not being able to get into the River, nor to stay out, because of the Flats, where an indifferent Wind may do much Harm, the least Part whereof was the Loss of the Vessels; Gallinato therefore considering, that if they should be cast away, the King was in his own Country, whence it would be impossible to get him out again, tho’ a greater Power should be gather’d for that End, than what came from the Philippine Islands, and having consulted with him about the Method to be us’d to get in to Gamocanora, the Sangiack of that His Advice to the Spaniards. Place said to him. Sir, if you have such Confidence in me, as I know you may, and my Advice is of any Force with you, do not go thither with these Galleys, for you will expose them to Shoals, and Winds. Since therefore here are two Carcoas of Tydore, let the Captain Villagra, the Notary, and the Interpreter go aboard them, and I will go along with them to my Country, where the same shall be done, as if the Galleys went in.

Villagra trusts the Sangiack. Gallinato consulted with Villagra, and they approv’d of the Method, setting out in the Carcoas on Saturday in the Afternoon, and on Sunday Morning a League short of the River, the Sangiack told the Captain, he well knew he had been long from his Country, attending the King, and that his Subjects had no certain Account of him, and therefore, they might then as they us’d to do at other Times, come out to the Mouth of the River with a Fleet, to guard the Entrance. That if it should so happen, he must not he disturb’d, for they should all serve him. The Captain, told him, how much he confided in him, since he had so easily follow’d his Advice, and was come to his Country almost Naked; and that whatsoever happen’d he would not He appeases his Subjects. mistrust him. Being come near the Mouth of the River, they saw 13 Vessels come out, and when in the Sea, they drew up in a half Moon, and made up to enclose the Captain’s Carcoa. The Sangiack seeing them near at Hand, went forward, and calling out, commanded them to be peaceable. As soon as they knew him, they obey’d, drew together their Vessels, and came to speak to him. He enquir’d into the Posture of his Affairs, and ask’d whether his Mother was there. They said she was, and gave him a long Account of all Things. They went before to carry his Mother the News of his Coming, and he order’d them to assemble all the People of the Town, and that none should appear arm’d, for they never us’d to lay aside their [252]Campilanes. Being come in, they found all, and even the Women got together, A Vessel sail’d by none but Women. and imbarking again, met the Sangiacks Mother in the Middle of the River, she then coming down, to see her Son, in a Vessel all full of Women, clad in several Sorts of Silks, with high Feathers, and several of them arm’d. Some handed the Sails, others ply’d the Oares, and others attended about that Princesses Person, so that there was not one Man among them.

Meeting of the Sangiack and his Mother. The Mother being impatient, advanc’d as soon as ever she came to her Son’s Carcoa; but he more nimbly leap’d into that Vessel of Women, and after paying the due Respect to his Mother, there pass’d extraordinary Demonstrations of Love on both Sides, she imbracing, and kissing her Son. Thus they all went up the River, against the Stream, till they came to the Town. On both the Banks there appear’d People clad in gay Manner, with Feathers, but unarm’d, and the Sangiack having desir’d his Mother to go ashore, all the Prime Men to perswade her leap’d into the Water, and carryed her in their Arms. The Sangiack and Villagra came to the Market-Place, in the midst whereof they found an Arbour, or Hut made of Boughs, on Timbers, and in it two Chairs, on a Carpet. They set down with the usual Ceremonies, and the Sangiack declar’d to his Subjects, that all the Dominions of the King of Ternate, and their Persons, were then subject to the King of Spain, as he was himself. That hereupon follow’d the Obligation of delivering up the Forts to him, and he was possess’d of all the Rest, only that being wanting. That they should so order that Captain Villagra His great Submission to the Spaniards. might take Possession of it and the Artillery. Villagra intreated the Sangiack to go see his Wife, and Children, and he would receive the Surrender of the Fort, and Arms, in the Afternoon; but he answer’d, that he came not to rejoyce with his Family, but to serve the King of Spain. Afterwards he added, If you will have me see them I will make Use of your Leave; and if you refuse it, will imbark without seeing them. Villagra would not allow of such rigid Nicety, pressing him to take the Satisfaction of his Family, before the Act of Possession, and in the mean while, stay’d himself with John de Vega, and Antony de Sylva.

His Noble Entertainment. As soon as the Sangiack came Home, he sent the Captain about 30 Indians loaded with Provisions, one after another, but first they brought Tables, Chairs; and Table-Linnen in their great Dishes, and Salvers, and on them the Salts, Knives, drinking Cups, and Ewres, Variety of Fruit, Pullets roasted and fry’d, Goats Flesh roasted and boil’d, and other Dishes, after the Fashion of their Country. A little before the Dinner was ended they brought a Bed, and Pillows of green Satin, which they laid upon Carpets, to take an Afternoons Nap on. It was not long before the Sangiack himself came, follow’d by all the People, leading his Mother, and Arms deliver’d. with them many Men loaded with the Arms he was to deliver up, gather’d from Private Men, as also Drakes, Muskets, and other Fire-Arms. Indians brought them on their Shoulders, adorn’d with Boughs, in Token of the Satisfaction they had in delivering them. The same was then done in the Fort, as had been in the others. The Sangiack that Night gave the Captain a Supper in the same Manner as the Dinner had been. The next Day they breakfasted, and imbarking, return’d where Gallinato waited for them [253]in the Galleys, at Tacome, with some Indians of Sabubu, who came with a Message to Villagra, inviting him to go take Possession of the Fort.

Treacherous Design of the People of Sabubu. He suspected they had a treacherous Design, which was, that when they came to Sabubu, they would endeavour to have the Galleys come into the River, the Bar being proper for them, and having 1500 Men in Ambush, on both Sides of it, they would at Night send down some Fire-Ships upon them, then those that were in Ambush giving the Alarm, they might at least rescue their King, and the other Prisoners that were aboard; and in Case the Spaniards would not go in with their Galleys, they would seize Captain Villagra, when he landed, that the Governour might, in Exchange, for him deliver them the King of Ternate. A Portuguese Woman, who retir’d to Tacome, flying from Ternate when it was taken, and marry’d to a Renegado, tho’ she was herself a Christian, gave Gallinato A Portuguese Woman discovers the Design. Advice of this intended Treachery. He took no Notice, but privately advis’d Villagra to pretend he was sick. The Natives of Sabubu, again pressed for the Captain, that they might deliver him the Fort, and Gallinato desiring him to make ready to go thither, he excus’d himself, alledging his Indisposition. Vega and Sylva, and some other Officers, went without him, and did the same Thing he could have done, avoiding the Danger of the Treason.

Don Pedro restores Towns to the Owners. They return’d with the Galleys to Ternate, where they found Don Pedro, who condescending to some just Requests, and to others which depended on Courtesy, being only Matter of Bounty, restor’d several Towns, wrongfully taken. These were bestow’d on the Kings of Tydore, of Bachian, and of Sian. The last of these, tho’ he ought to have joyn’d the Governour before the Expedition came late, by Reason of contrary Winds. He restor’d eight Towns to the King of Tydore, Cachil Mole, he having been before possess’d of them in the Island of Machian. On Cachil Raxa Laudin, King of Bachian, who was always faithful to the Spaniards, and wounded at the Siege Andrew Furtado lay’d to Ternate, he bestow’d the Islands of Cayoa, Adoba, and Bayloro, which are near Bachian, as also Lucabata, Palomata, and other Towns. He gave Ruy Pereyra, the Sangiack of Labua, a notable Christian, and the King of Spain’s Subject, the Island of Gane to hold as Governour; and others to Paul de Lima, which his Family had formerly been possess’d of.

Don Pedro resolves to carry the Prisoners to Manila. Some Assemblies were held, to consult, what was to be done with the King and his Son. Upon summing up the Votes, it was Resolv’d that neither the one, nor the other, or any of the Prisoners of Note, being his Kinsmen, Cachiles and Sangiacks of Repute, should be left in the Moluccos; and that, for considerable Reasons, then appearing, it was not convenient, at that Time, to depose the King, but to allow him to appoint such peaceable Persons as he thought fit, to Govern the Kingdom. Don Pedro had, during this Time, writ to the King of Spain, acquainting him with the King of Ternate directed to appoint Governours. Success of the War, and approv’d of the Method of appointing Governours, and accordingly order’d the Captive King and Prince should be told, that this Form of Government was pitch’d upon to secure us against their Confederacies, since it was certain that they expected the Dutch, and had sent to invite them against the Spaniards. That the King was to understand, that his Liberty, and Restoration to his Kingdoms, depended on his good Behaviour for the future, and that of his Subjects; and their assisting the Spaniards [254]that were to be left at Ternate, and their friendly Entertainment of them. This Message was deliver’d to the King by F. Lewis Fernandez, of the Society Cachil Sugui, and Cachil Quipat Governours. of Jesus, Gallinato, and Esquivel. They did it with much Respect, adding, that he was to go to Manila, and therefore he should appoint such Persons, as he would have to Govern during his Absence. The King complying, submitted to every Thing, and nam’d Cachil Sugui, and Cachil Quipat, both of them his Unkles, to be Governours, because they were of a peaceable and honest Disposition.

A Day was appointed for the solemn Act of doing Homage. The great Hall in the Fort was hung with Silk, rich Canopys set up; the Governour Solemnity for swearing Fealty. took his Seat under the chiefest of them, all the Forces being at Arms; and then he declar’d to the Kings the Occasion of assembling them together, which was to swear Fealty to his Majesty, a Duty that had been so long put off, and at the same Time so much labour’d for by War.

Persons that swore Fealty. They swore Fealty to our Sovereign Lord King Philip, in the Person of the Governour Don Pedro. The first was Cachil Sultan Zayde Buxey, King of Ternate, and Cachil Sulamp Gariolano, the Prince, his Son. Then Cachil Mole, King of Tydore; Cachil Raxa Laudin, King of Bachian; Cachil Dini, King of Sian, who had never done it before, but only profess’d Friendship. After them swore the Sangiacks and Cachiles, Tulo, Codate, Amuxa, Rete, Ale, Nayo, Quipate, Colambaboa, Dexebes, Pamuza, Babada, Barcat, Sugi, Gugu, Boleyfe, Gulila, Maleyto, Banaba, all of them Princes, Kinsmen, and Subjects to the Molucco King. They promis’d not to admit of the Dutch, nor any other Nations, to the Trade of Clove, and to preserve it entirely for his Majesty, and his Subjects; and to be assisting with their Persons, Forces, and Ships, whensoever they should be call’d upon by the Commander of the Fort of Ternate, or of the Philippines. It was also agreed, that they should not any Way obstruct the Conversion of the Gentils that were inclin’d to embrace Christianity.

They were all satisfy’d with this Beginning of their new Subjection, because the King of Ternate oppress’d them, as being the most potent, and supported by the Dutch; nor had they any Security against his Tyranny; especially since he caus’d the King of Tydore’s Father to be treacherously murder’d, Another Fort built at Tydore. the King of Bachian’s in War, and a Kinsman of his, which they both still resented. Don Pedro order’d another Fort to be erected at Tydore, and a Captain with 50 Men to Garrison it; at the Request of the King, by whose Assistance it was finish’d. It was resolv’d, that for the present, the Ternate eas’d of Duties. third Part of the Duties the People of Ternate us’d to pay, should be taken off, so to make them easy, that they might reap some Benefit of our Victory, and not be perswaded it tended to increase their Oppression. The old Fort being small, and unfit to make any considerable Defence, it was thought fit to build one on a higher Ground, larger, and stronger. The Plan was laid out, and Orders given for carrying on the Work. The said old Fort was brought into a narrow Compass, whilst the new one was raising, which the Governour, before he departed Ternate, saw finish’d, quite enclos’d, and strengthned with Ramparts. Six hundred Men, distributed into six Companies, Men left at Ternate. were left in it, to defend the Island against any Invasion. Six other Captains were reform’d. There were also twelve Gunners, 65 Pioneers, 35 Masons, and two good Brigantines, which, in Case of Necessity, [255]Esquivel Governour. might be mann’d with Pioneers. Colonel John de Esquivel was appointed Commander in chief, and Governour of all the Moluccos.

Don Pedro, the Day before his Departure, gave the said Governour his Instructions, which had been maturely weighed, and debated, after several private Conferences with him, providing for all Accidents that might happen.

Prisoners shipp’d for Manila. All the Prisoners, being the King and Prince of Ternate, and 24 Sangiacks and Cachiles, were put aboard the Admiral Galley, under the Care of Captain Villagra, with particular Orders to convey them to Manila. This done they set sail. Our Fleet being departed with the Booty, and Prisoners, the Colonel, John de Esquivel, apply’d himself diligently to the Affairs of his Charge, and to hastning on the Fortifications begun in several Parts. Whilst the Conquerors King of Tydore sent to Sabubu. sail’d away, on the fourth of May, he order’d the King of Tydore, with his Fleet, and in it some Spaniards, commanded by the Captains Pasqual de Aragon, and Martin de Esquivel, to sail for Sabubu, to perswade the Cachiles, Sugui and Quipati, to return to the City; because by their Examples the Citizens and Multitude would do the like, they being fled to the Mountains on Account of the War; for so they would quit those Deserts, be encouraged to confide in the Conqueror, and settle in Peace. The King of Tydore arriv’d at Sabubu, with his Company; sent Messengers to them, who deliver’d what they were commission’d with, adding, that if they requir’d Hostages for their safe coming, they should have the Spanish Captains that were The Governours refuse to come. in the Fleet deliver’d to them. The Governours were so far from giving Ear to their Message, that they sent to conjure them to depart Sabubu. Esquivel was concern’d at this mistrustful and rough Behaviour, because the greatest Part of the People of the Island were in that strong Hold, and in Gilolo, and that Repulse in the Presence of the Natives that were fled, seem’d to threaten greater Opposition. Whilst he prepar’d to reduce them, he endeavour’d by fair Means to attract the Inhabitants of a Town, call’d Tacome, two Leagues from Ternate, whither also some of those that had fled were retir’d. He sent them a considerable Quantity of Plunder, plac’d Safeguards in Tacome and Malayo, to quiet, and defend them against the Tydores, their Enemies and Conquerors.

The King of Tydore, and our Commanders, returning without any Effect Spanish Ships at Machian. from Sabubu, they sail’d with the Fleet to Machian, to recover peaceably that Part of the Island, which the Governour, Don Pedro, took from the King two Dutch Ships. of Ternate, to restore it to him of Tydore. At the same Time two Dutch Ships arriv’d there; one of them was the same our Fleet found some Days before in the Fort Talangame; which having been a Witness to our Success, rejoyn’d the other, and both of them came together to the Moluccos, by Order of the Dutch Commander residing at Amboyna, to encourage the King of Ternate to persist in his Disobedience, and assist him against our Fleet. Our Men sent the Colonel Advice, who order’d our Galliots to set out, to find, and pursue those Ships, that so their Boats might not offer to move far from them, and to endeavour to obstruct their trading with the Natives. Tho’ the Orders were obey’d, the said two Ships appear’d before Ternate the third Day after, and holding on their Course, anchor’d at Gilolo, where most of the Natives of the Molucco Islands, who were fled, had fortify’d themselves. These Guests, according to their Custome, call’d together all [256]the Inhabitants, who were dispers’d about in other Towns, and resolv’d to go over to Gilolo and Sabubu. They gather’d all their Vessels, and thought, with them, and the Dutch Ships, to obstruct the Ravage our Galiots made, and to support their Friends. This new Rebellion was carryed on in Sight of the Dutch Ships lying at Anchor before Gilolo, and they secur’d, and defended them against our Squadrons.

Rebellion at Gilolo. The Colonel intreated the King of Tydore, who was newly return’d from Machian, to gather a greater Number of arm’d Carcoas, that our Infantry might be carry’d in them, and the Galiots, to attack Gilolo, and Sabubu, in Order to suppress that Mischief in its first Rise, there being other Places for our Vessels to put into, besides the Harbour where the Enemies Ships lay at Anchor. The King of Tydore started so many Difficulties, that Esquivel could not prevail upon him. Another more effectual Method was found. Methods for suppressing it. It being certain, that the Fugitives must bring their Provisions, and particularly Rice, from the Province del Moro, and Island of Moratay, where there is great Plenty; and that we having burnt the Ships of the Moluccos, during that War, they would supply the Want of them from those same Places; the Governour therefore resolv’d, that Major Vergara, and the King of Tydore, should repair thither with 120 Spaniards, to disappoint their Designs, that so Necessity might reduce them to submit.

120 Spaniards sent to Gilolo. Our Forces arriv’d at the Island Batochina, which is the same as Gilolo, and where Sabubu stands. Leaving the Shore, they march’d over extraordinary wooded Mountains, along the Side of the River Gabocanora, to a great Town, the Receptacle of many of the Fugitives. They met with no Opposition, or other Obstacle in the Way, but only those sharp pointed Stakes they use to drive into the Ground. The Enemy had plac’d their greatest Defence upon the River; but abandon’d it upon the Approach of the Spaniards, running up into the Mountains, and leaving their Houses They burn Towns and reduce the Island. and Vessels. Our Men fell upon both, burnt them, and took such as durst stay behind. In fine, they all, dismay’d at the Sight of the Flames and Destruction, embrac’d more submissive methods. The City Visoa underwent the same Fate, and the Remains of it sued for Pardon, and comply’d.

The King of Tydore went away from this Place with eight Carcoas, leaving the rest, and the Galleys, with the Major. The City Mamuya, having Galela destroy’d. made Resistance, was also burnt. Our Men went over in small Vessels to Galela, a Town built in a large Lake, which held out till reduc’d by Fire and Sword, the very Children swimming away. Tolo, Chiava, and Camafo, Tolo, Chiava and Camafo submit. which are three Leagues from Galela, and whose Inhabitants had been formerly Christians, prevented Military Execution, by sending Deputies from Tolo, the strongest of them, with Boughs of Bonanas in Blossom, and Green, and White Cloves. They came unarm’d, and with Musick, and express’d much Sorrow for their late Rebellion, for which Sultan Zayde was to blame, and for having forsaken the Christian Religion, which they were there ready to imbrace. The Spanish Commander prais’d, and treated them Courteously. Our Men now sickned a pace; for which Reason, as also because the westerly Winds began to grow boisterous, he was oblig’d to defer the subduing of Moratay. However he left some Men at Tolo, with the small Guns taken at Gabocanora, to secure the Towns that [257]were reduc’d, and defend them against those of Galela and Tabelo, which are biger than they. This done he return’d to Ternate, but not without Storms, and Dangers, incurr’d by giving Credit to a Molucco Slave.

The Governour mann’d a Galliot, a Brigantine, and some smaller Vessels with Soldiers, and Chineses to row, under the Command of the Ensign Christopher Suarez. He sail’d with a fair Wind for the Island Mateo, Message from Esquivel to the Heathen Kings of Bool, and Totoli. which we call Celebes, the nearest Part whereof is 30 Leagues West from Ternate, and its Length above 150 Leagues. The furthest Part of it is subject to the King of Macassar, a Mahometan Prince, with whom the People of Malaca have Trade, as also with three other heathen Kings, of whom there was a Report, that they desired to be Christians; but they fell under the Tyranny of the King of Ternate, and suffer’d by his Invasions and Burnings. Esquivel sent to acquaint them with the King of Spain’s Victories and Success; and exhorted them to come under his Dominion, but above all to be united to the Church. He made them Presents of European Commodities, which are as good as Money with them, and offer’d the Protection of the Spanish Power, which had pull’d down that Tyrant, to whom they were Tributary. He said, he sent them Ships and Arms, and that for the Time to come, they might safely repair to trade at the Moluccos. These Princes were two Brothers, the one King of Bool, the other of Totoli. They rejoyc’d at the coming of the Embassador Christopher Suarez, and he presenting them some Pieces of Velvet, in Token of Friendship, they return’d other Gifts, and Abundance of Provisions, and dismiss’d him, with a Letter to the Governour. Queen Dongue of Cauripa, testify’d to Esquivel no less Satisfaction, and Inclination to be united to the King of Spain by Vassalage.

King of Tydore’s Actions. The Garrisons of the Rebellious Towns were assaulted by the Spaniards, and compell’d to submit. The King of Tydore made Havock on the Coast of Batochina, or Gilolo, where he recover’d for his Majesty, and for himself, the Towns and Forts that had been taken from him by the King of Ternate. He plunder’d the great Town of Mira, in Moratay, and made Captives of many that oppos’d him, who had also been Christians. Among the rest he took a Guimala, which signifies, a Chief, or Head of a Quarter, or Ward, whom he again set at Liberty, at the Request of our Men, sending him away with two other Guimalas, in the Company of Captain John Meaos Islands subdu’d. de la Torre. The Islands in those Parts were reducing by Degrees, with little Opposition. Those of the Meaos, lying to the North-West, towards Manila, being among, and full of large Towns, defended themselves, with the Assistance, and Industry of the Dutch; but B. Antony Flores, a Lay-Brother, of the Order of S. Augustin, who fought against the Sangleyes of Manila, as has been said above, coming thither with the Galleys, they submitted. The Ensign Lewis de Zuazo arriv’d after the Business was over, and they being now successful, and understanding that the Dutch Ship was sail’d from Gilolo, made after her. She was so good a Sailer, Reduction of other Islands. that they labour’d in vain; but carry’d on the War at Gilolo and Sabubu, which made the Ternate Governours put up their Complaints, and lay aside their Designs. They writ to the Governour, and he answer’d them, sending a Copy of the Articles, upon which they offer’d to repair to Ternate, in peaceable Manner. All our Commanders were dispers’d in several [258]Places, reducing the Islands of the Moluccos that had Rebell’d, either by Force of Arms, or other Methods; and particularly those belonging to the Sultan of Ternate, which are few under an hundred; and thus Peace began to be establish’d, which if not Wish’d for, was at least Tolerated, and accepted of with such Appearances as are becoming to make it honourable.

The King and Molucco Prisoners attempt to escape. Whilst the Molucco Islands submitted by Force to receive the Yoke, the Governour, Don Pedro de Acunna, was sailing for Manila. Captain Villagra was at a Distance from the Fleet, with the King, Prince, and Sangiacks that were Prisoners, aboard the Admiral Galley. This made them form a Design to attempt to make their Escape to Mindanao, and they had succeeded, if not prevented by the Soldiers that guarded them. Captain Villagra either Suspected, or had Information of it, and therefore doubled the Guards, and put eight of the most daring into Chains. Among the most remarkable were Cachil Amuxa, the Sangiack Rete, and he of Mofaquia. They all arriv’d at Manila, but their Fetters were taken off before they came thither, after they had worn them ten Days, with much Regret of the King, whom they satisfy’d with Hopes, and acquainting him with some of the Grounds there were to suspect, till the Danger of laying them aside ceas’d. The Hazard at Mindanao was, that those Islands are not Tributary, yet they value themselves upon entertaining Friendship with the King of Ternate; and it is most certain, that had he attempted to fly, and succeeded in it, they would have supported him there, and Villagra had Intelligence given him, that the King either made, or approv’d of the Proposal; tho’ there was no want of Care and Vigilancy either in Don Pedro’s Ship, or the Admiral Galley.

During all this Time we have spoken of, the News of our Success was not brought to the Philippine Islands. This long Silence, and Want of Intelligence, became an Argument in those Parts, and particularly at Manila, that Don Pedro and the Fleet were lost, or at least had met with such Don Pedro de Acunna suppos’d to be poison’d. ill Success as deserv’d to be generally lamented. Virtue never fail’d of envious Persons to persecute it, and accordingly Don Pedro was not without them at Manila; but tho’ they were well known, in so much that in the general Opinion of all Men, they are suppos’d to have given the Poison, whereof that great Man was thought to have dy’d 22 Days after his Return, we will nevertheless suppress their Names, since it is not the Part of an Author, whose Duty it is to observe an exact Neutrality, and not to be led any Way by Affection, to confirm that Deposition, which, as yet, is no better grounded than on Suspicion. They are all Dead long since, False Reports abroad. and have been try’d before that great Tribunal, where the least thought cannot pass without being accounted for. These Men gave out, That Don Pedro attacking Ternate, enter’d it successfully; but that his Men had been too intent upon Plunder, the Enemy rallyed, and falling upon the Spaniards, beat them out again, killing most of them. And that the General being asham’d of his ill Conduct, durst not return to Manila.

Indians begin to Mutiny. This Report being spread abroad among the Indians, did so much Harm, that they began to Mutiny, especially in the Provinces of Camarines, and Pintados; in so much that the Fryers who attended their Instruction, could not deal with them any longer, for they said, That since the People [259]of the Moluccos were victorious, why should they be still subject to the Spaniards, who did not defend them against the Moors, and these would now plunder them daily with the Assistance of Ternate, and it would be worse for the Future. Nor were they satisfy’d with muttering, but proceeded to confer Notes together, and to contrive putting their Projects in Execution. But all this vanish’d at the Sight of Truth, and the News of it, brought in before the Arrival of the Conquerors, and the Preparations they saw made for their Reception, and triumphant Rejoycings. The Weather was seasonable, and favour’d them in all Respects, and they arriv’d at Manila on the ninth of June, loaded with Honour and Victory, after they had rested in the Port of Cabite, two Leagues distant.

Prisoners disconsolate. The Captives diverted themselves with our Men, to put off the Remembrance of past Times, whilst rich Garments of several Sorts of Silks were provided for them at the Publick Charge, which is the King’s Treasury in the Philippine Islands. They look’d dejectedly, and with Admiration, on the Harbour, Walls, Forts, and Buildings of the City, the Sight whereof made them call to Mind the last Day on which they fell from their boasted State of Liberty. Our Commanders dropt some courteous Words of Comfort in their Discourse, telling them, that as soon as the News could come to Spain of their being reduc’d, and that good Order was taken against falling again into the former Dangers, the King would order them to be restor’d to their Liberty. All these Expressions were not of Force to satisfy those Indians, who on the contrary began to complain of the General, because they either suspected, or were told by some of our Men, that he would not observe the safe Conduct, and promise he had made them in the King’s Name, and on which they had rely’d; and that in Case Sultan Zayde were continu’d in the Philippine Islands, it was certain they would send his Son, Prince Gariolano into Europe, by the Way of New Spain. The general being acquainted with these melancholly Reflections of theirs, thought it concern’d the Reputation of the Christian Religion in general, and of the Spanish Nation in particular, to dispell those Jealousies, and therefore he writ to them, and directed the Captain, who carry’d the Letters, to perswade the King not to conceive the least Mistrust of the King’s Word, and Security he had confided in. This compos’d their Thoughts, and they either did, or pretended to take Comfort.

Don Pedro’s Entry into Manila. The Prisoners came with the Forces to the City, which the Fleet saluted with its Cannon, and were answer’d by the Artillery and small Shot from the Walls and Forts. The King landed in a Garden the Governor had without the Walls, where he repos’d himself that Night, and when Lodgings were provided for him, with the greatest State that could be, and answerably for other Prisoners, according to their Qualities, Don Pedro enter’d Manila with the Forces, and Ostentation of Captives and Booty. There wanted not Triumphal Arches, with such Inscriptions as are Generally Description of the King of Ternate. set on them in Honour of Conquerors. The Habit of the Prisoners, in rich Mantles, Turbants and Plumes, was not sutable to their Fortune; as making their Countenances look more haughty, and representing Arrogancy. That King was strong body’d, and his Limbs well Knit; his Neck, and great Part of his Arms he wore naked; his Skin being of the Color of a Cloud, rather inclin’d to Black than Tawny. The Features of his Face were like [260]an European. His Eyes large, full, and sparkling, to which they add the Fierceness of long Eyebrows, thick Beards and Whiskers, and lank Hair. He always wore his Campilane, or Cimiter, and Criz, or Dagger; the Hilts of them both resembling the Heads of Snakes gilt. This is affirm’d by Officers that attended, and convers’d with him familiarly, to whom he was obligingly Courteous, and it appears by Relations, and by the Picture drawn to the Life, which the General sent into Spain for the King.

Rejoycings. The Rejoycings for the Victory were continu’d with much Solemnity, the Indians, who were the principal Subject of them, being present. The King of Ternate understanding that Messengers were sending away to Spain to carry the News of the Success, and Account of the Prisoners, writ a short Letter to the King, intermixt with Commendations of Don Pedro de Acunna and some other Spanish Commanders. He represented the change of his Condition, with somewhat of Submission, but not Humility, or rather Meanness; and intreated his Majesty to extend his Royal Goodness towards the Conquer’d, for his own Magnanimity’s sake, and on Account of the perpetual Fidelity, and Vassalage they had sworn to him. This Letter was writ by another Hand, and in Spanish. When it was given him to sign, the King turn’d the upside down, and Writ his Name on the white half Page in Persian Characters, thinking he had sign’d at the Beginning, or Top of the Letter, as is practis’d by the Princes of those Countries. The Moluccos being Reduc’d, our Ministers and Preachers went over thither, and the Voice of the Gospel resounded again in the utmost Borders of the Earth.

FINIS.
