---
heading: Book 1
linkTitle: Book 1
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


Preparations of the Viceroy.

The Viceroy of Peru was of Opinion, That in Order to secure the Indies, their Peace and Religion, and for the removing, at first, of all Obstacles to its Exaltation, and making Examples for a Warning, it was of the greatest Consequence to erect Forts, as divine and humane politick Precautions, and to Arm against that Pyrate, so to give a Check to the Northern Parts by his Punishment. To this Purpose, and in Order to his Destruction, a more exact Observation was to be taken of the Passes into the South-Sea, and more particularly of the Way he was to take, to return into his own Country. 

He was egg’d on by Fear, or the Loss of Reputation, [73]because some English Ships, Part of Drake’s Squadron, ran along the Coasts of Chile and Arica, obliging the People to Arm; it being apprehended that Drake had erected Forts to secure the Passage, for carrying on the Trade of Spice and Jewels, and the bringing in of perverting Ministers with their poisonous Doctrines. For this Effect, he pitch’d upon Peter Sarmiento de Gamboa, a Gentleman of Galicia, who had twice already engag’d with that Pyrate. The first in the Port of Callao near Lima, where he took from him a Spanish Ship, laden with Commodities of Spain; the second a few Days after, pursuing him as far as Panama. The Viceroy resolv’d he should go to discover the Streights of Magellan, an Enterprize look’d upon as impractable by the South Sea, by Reason of the many Mouths and Channels which obstruct the Access to it, where many Difficultie of the Streight of Magellan. Discoverers sent by the Governours of Peru and Chile have been lost. Others have attempted it, entering from the North Sea, and miss’d of the Streight; some were cast away, or beaten back by Storm, and all generally despair’d of finding it. But now that Terror being remov’d, they can take a fix’d Latitude, settle a Rumb, and steer a safe Course to the Streight, so to secure the Passage before an Enemy possesses himself of it.

The Viceroy made Choice of two Ships, which he took Care to see well rigg’d, arm’d and provided. Sarmiento call’d the Bigger, Our Lady of Hope, which was Commodore; the other being subordinate, had the Name of S. Francis. Two Hundred Seamen and Soldiers were put into them, with virtuous and learned Religious Men, fit for that Employ. Sarmiento sent after Drake with two Ships. Captain John de Villalobos was appointed Vice-Admiral. Ferdinand Lamero Head Pilot, and under him Ferdinand Alonso and Antony Pablo, all of them very able Pilots in both Seas. These took an Oath of Fidelity, and the Viceroy gave the Admiral particular Instructions, the Purport whereof was, That they should pursue the Pyrate, fight him till taken or kill’d, and recover the great Booty he had taken upon the King’s Lands His Instructions. and Ships, whatsoever the Hazard might be, since they had sufficient Men, Arms and Ammunition to overcome the Enemy. That they should sail into 50 or 54 Degrees of South Latitude, as might be most Advantageous, about the Mouth of the Streights of Magellan. That both Ships should have Lights out at Night, that so they might not lose Sight of one another in the Dark, but always keep together. He charg’d them to be unanimous in their Consultations, particularly the two Commanders; which Direction was not so well observ’d, as it ought to have been, thro’ the Vice-Admiral’s Fault. They were commanded to lay down the Ports, and Seas in exact Draughts. To take Possession of any Country they landed on for his Majesty. When they met with any Towns of Indians, to mollify and endear them by discreet Courtesy, and gain their Affections with such Gifts, as should for that Purpose be deliver’d to the Commodore, being Sissars, Combs, Knives, Fishing-Hooks, Buttons of several Colours, Looking-Glasses, Hawks-Bells, Glass-Beads, &c. To carry with them some Indians to serve for Interpreters; and so provided discreetly for all other material Points. Then to encourage them he made a Speech, intermixing it with Hopes and Exhortations. The Commodore having conferr’d with his Vice-Admiral and Pilots, concerning the Design of their Voyage; they agreed, That if any Stress of Weather should happen to part the [74]one Ship from the other, they should carefully seek one another out, or make the Mouth of the Streight in the South-Sea to the Westward, there to wait for one another. The next Day being Sunday, the 11th of October, 1579, when they had all confess’d and receiv’d the Holy Eucharist, they embark’d in order to introduce the Faith into those Nations void of all Worship. On Board the Capitana, or greater Ship, the General, or Commodore Sarmiento, F. Antony de Guadramiro, of the Order of S. Francis, and Vicar-General of this Expedition; the Ensign John Gutierrez de Guevara, Antony Pablos, and Ferdinand Alonso, Pilots, with 54 Soldiers. In the other Ship, with John de Villalobos, F. Christopher de Merida, of the said Order of S. Francis, Ferdinand Lamero, chief Pilot of that Ship, His Strength. with whom, and the Seamen and Soldiers, they made 54; and the whole Number in both Vessels as was said above.

They sail’d from the Port of Callao, belonging to the City of Lima, and that Night came to an Anchor at the Island, two Leagues from Callao, in His Voyage. 12 Degrees and a half of South Latitude. On the first of November they pass’d in Sight of those they call Unfortunate, in 25 Degrees, 20 Minutes, which were accidentally discover’d by the Pilot John Fernandez, being bound for Chile the second Time, immediately after Magellan’s Discovery, since the Year 1520. They are now call’d, the Islands of S. Felix, and S. Ambor. Here Sarmiento observ’d the Difference, betwixt this Course, which he calls the True one, and the Imaginary. This he noted down His Care and Capacity. with extraordinary Curiosity, employing all the Care and Art of his Pilots, and his own, which was not inferior to theirs, nor to others in any Martial Knowledge, as will appear by his Treatises, if publish’d, of Navigation, casting great Guns and Bullets, Fortification, and Knowledge in Astronomy, for failing in all Seas. They never quitted the Lead, the Astrolabe, and the Charts, either in the Deep, in Ports, Bays, or among Mountains, and Currents, which produc’d a very ample Relation he sent to King Philip, whence we took this Abridgement. There he sets down the Points in the Heaven answering to the Earth, the Dangers, Islands, Promontories and Gulphs, Geographically and Corographically. He lays down the Rumbs that are to be follow’d, and those to be avoided; and thus distinctly leads us into and thro’ the Streight, giving visible Signs, and also invisible of the Winds for all Ports. At the first unknown Land, where he anchor’d, they found the Latitude to be 49 Degrees and a half Land at the Mouth of the Streights. South. They saw no People, but Tokens of them, as the Prints of Mens Feet, Darts, Oars, and little Nets. They climb’d up vast high Mountains, above two Leagues in the Ascent, over Stones, some of them so sharp, that they cut their Shoes. Others, to avoid them, made their way on the Boughs of Trees. From the Top they discover’d great Channels, Inlets, Rivers, and Harbours, and all the Land as far as their Sight could reach, seem’d to them cut and rent asunder. They judg’d it to be an Archipelago. It is to be observ’d, that our Discoverers give the Name of Archipelagos, to Seas in the New World, which are strew’d thick with Islands, as it were great Stones, like the Archipelago of Greece, so well known to all Nations in the Egean Sea, which contains the Cyclades, tho’ the Name is not ancient. They perceiv’d the Channel to run on, Wide, Spacious, Open and Clean; and were satisfi’d that Drake came out that [75]Way into the South Sea. They found the Latitude by three Astrolabes to be 50 Degrees. The Harbour they call’d of, Our Lady of the Rosary, and the Island of the most Holy Trinity.

The next Sunday, Sarmiento order’d all the Men to land, in order to take Possession, and perform’d all that is contain’d in the Authentick Instrument Sarmiento takes Possession of the Land. of what happen’d that Day, the express Words whereof are thus,

‘In the Name of the most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one only God, who is the Beginning, Maker and The Form of it. Creator of all Things; without whom nothing that is Good can be done, began, or preserv’d. And in regard that a good Beginning must be in God, and through God, and in him it is requisite to begin, to his Honour and Glory, and in his most Holy Name, Be it known to all those who shall see this Instrument, that this Day, being Sunday the 22d of November, 1579, this Royal Navy of the Mighty Renowned Lord, King Philip of Spain, and its other Dominions, my Sovereign, being arriv’d in this Country by Order of the most Excellent Lord, Don Francisco de Toledo, Viceroy, Governour, and Captain General of Peru, to discover the Streight of Magellan, under the Command of the General Peter Sarmiento, the Land by him nam’d, Our Lady of the Rosary, and the Bay of, The most Holy Trinity. The said Lord General having landed with most of the Sea and Landmen belonging to his Navy, and the Religious Men, he brought ashore a Cross, which he devoutly worshipp’d, with all his Men. The Religious Men sang the Hymn Te Deum laudamus, and he with a loud Voice, said, That in the Name of his Majesty Philip the Second, our Lord, King of Castile and Aragon, and their Dependencies, whom our Lord God long preserve, with the Addition of greater Kingdoms and Dominions, for the Glory of God, and Good and Prosperity of his Subjects; and in the Name of the most Potent Kings his Heirs and Successors for the Time being; he, as his Commander in chief, and Admiral of this same Navy, and by Virtue of the Order and Instructions given him in his Majesty’s Royal Name, by the said Lord Viceroy of Peru, took, did take, seiz’d, and did seize the Possession of this Land on which he is now ashore, and which he has discover’d for evermore, in the said Royal Name, and of the said Crown of Castile and Leon, as has been said, as being his own, and really belonging to him, by Virtue of the Donation and Gift the Holy Father Alexander the Sixth, Pope of Rome, pass’d Motu proprio, in Favour of their Catholick Majesties Ferdinand the Fifth and Isabel his Wife, King and Queen of Castile and Leon of glorious Memory, and to their Heirs and Successors, of the one half of the World, being 180 Degrees of Longitude, as is more fully contain’d in the said Bull, dated at Rome, on the 4th of May, 1493. By Virtue whereof, these said Lands fall, lye, and are included within the Limits and Meridian of the said Partition of 180 Degrees of Longitude, belonging to the said Royal Crown of Castile and Leon. And as such he takes, and did take Possession of these said Lands, and their Territories, Seas, Rivers, Creeks, Ports, Bays, Gulphs, Archipelagos, and of this said Harbour of the Rosary, where at present this Navy is at Anchor. And he subjects, [76]and did subject them to the Power, Possession and Dominion of the said Royal Crown, as has been said, as being their own Property. And in Token of Possession, or as it were, drawing the Sword he had by his Side, with it he cut Trees, Branches, and Grass, and remov’d Stones, and walk’d over the Fields and Shores, without any Opposition; requiring such as were present to be Witnesses thereof, and me the underwritten Notary, to give him a Testimonial thereof in publick Form. And immediately, taking up a great Cross, and the Men belonging to the Navy being drawn up in a martial Manner, with Muskets and other Arms, they carry’d the Cross in Procession, the Religious Men, F. Antony de Guadramiro, the Vicar and his Companion, singing the Litany, and all the others answering. And the said Procession being ended, the said Lord General planted the Cross on a hard Rock, and rais’d a heap of Stones at the Foot of the Cross, in Token, and as a Memorial of Possession of all the Lands and Seas, discover’d, adjacent, and contiguous. And he gave the Name of Our Lady of the Rosary to this Port, as has been said. And as soon as the Cross was set up, they worshipp’d it a second Time; and they all pray’d, beseeching and intreating our Lord JESUS CHRIST, would be pleas’d that what they did might be for his Glory, and to the End that our Holy Catholick Faith might be exalted and dilated, and the Holy Gospel preach’d and spread abroad among these barbarous Nations, which have hitherto been remote from the true Knowledge and Doctrine; that it may defend and deliver them from the Frauds and Dangers of the Devil, and from the Blindness they are in, that their Souls may be sav’d. And then the Religious Men sung in Honour of the Cross, the Hymn Vexilla Regis. Next the Father Vicar said Mass on an Altar there erected, being the first that was ever said in that Country, to the Honour and Glory of our Almighty Lord God, and for the Extirpation of the Devil and all Idolatry. And he preach’d to that Purpose, and some confess’d and communicated. And as soon as the Mass was said, the General, for a more absolute Token and Memorial of Possession, caus’d a large Tree to be trimm’d, and on it caus’d a very high Cross to be made, and on it plac’d the most Holy Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. J. N. R. I. And under it, Philippus Secundus Rex Hispaniarum. Of all which, I John de Esquivel, Royal Secretary to this Navy and Admiral Ship, do give Affidavit and true Testimony, that it was so done as is said. Then follows Esquivel’s Subscription.’

Sarmiento gives Names to Places. Four Days after, Sarmiento, in the Vice-Admiral’s Boat, with the Pilots, Pablos and Lamero, and ten Sailors and Soldiers, with Muskets, Bucklers and Swords, and four Days Provision, set out of this Port to discover the Channels they saw, that they might not endanger the Ships. Going out by the Ridges of Rocks, he run along the Gulph, close to the Shore, all which he observ’d, and sounded the Harbours, giving Names to them and the Mountains, according to their Shapes, such as Sugar-Loaves, Pitchers, Guinea Peppers, and the like. He observ’d the Trees, the Plants and the Birds. At one Place on the Shore he found several Tracts of People, and two Poniards or such Weapons made of Bone, with a Cross on the Handles, near a small Stream of fresh Water, whose [77]Sands are Red, and therefore he call’d it the Red-River, which falls into a Harbour, and that also took the same Name. They saw abundance of Fish, and among the Shells thrown up by the Sea, vast Quantities of Oysters and Mussels, and in those that were left upon the Rocks above the Water, great and small Pearls, some Grey, others White. This Sort of Pearls despis’d for Hunger. Fish, at certain Times, the Shells being first open, gape with their Mouths, and receive the pure and substantial Dew, which, as it were, impregnates them with Pearls, which are in Colour answerable to the Nature of the Dew. If they receive it pure, they produce them white; if disturb’d, they are of a Dark, or other Muddy Colours. Sarmiento describes the Vexation that tormented him and his Men; for being eager to satisfy their Hunger with Oysters and Mussels, and they being unfit to Eat, because of the Hardness of those Pearls they found in them, they threw them away, cursing the Inventors of putting a Value on those Productions, or Hornynesses of Fishes, which Nature had trebly hid in the Waters of the Sea, in Shells, and in the Fish it self. They said, that true Wealth consisted in tame Cattle, Fruit, and Corn brought up by Tillage, as they had in Spain; for that precious Obstacle to feeding, then not valu’d, depriving them of the Sustenance of the Shell-Fish, and being forc’d to live ten Days on the Provision they brought for four, the Fast made them all Philosophers. From this Red Harbour, he was obliged to return to the Ships left in that of the Rosary, no Day passing without violent Storms; when they had run backward, and forward, above 70 Leagues, landing on Islands, and taking Possession of them. They were Fruitful and Habitable, but till then Untill’d and Desart. From a very high Hill, he discover’d the main Chanel, which runs out into the great Ocean, and so many other Channels and small Islands, that they could not be reckon’d up in a long Time. Whilst he staid, he sounded Harbours, Deeps, Channels, Creeks, Inlets, Flats, Roads and Bays, making Draughts of, and giving them Names. He settled the Latitude, and certain Course to be steer’d, in the Presence, and with the Opinion of the Pilots, Seamen, and Soldiers, in order to reconcile those disagreeing Persons by examining all that were present.

Here the Vice-Admiral began to cavil, saying, They were imbay’d, and Vice-Admiral disagrees with Sarmiento. that it was impossible to hold on their Voyage that Way; and would have quitted his Admiral, as he did afterwards. From Red-Port they held on their Course, trying those in other Islands. Sarmiento came to a Bay, which he call’d S. Francis’s, where, as they were taking their Station, a Soldier fired a Piece at some Birds, and in Answer to the Gun, certain Indians, near a Mountain, on the other Side of the Bay, gave horrid Shouts. By the first Noise, the Spaniards thought it had been made by Sea-Wolves, till they discover’d the naked Red Bodies. They afterwards Painted Indians. found the Reason of that Colour, for they daub’d themselves from the Head to the Feet with a glutinous Red-Earth. Sarmiento took some of his Company into a Boat, and coming to a Thicket, found them in the closest of the Trees, without any other Cloathing but that Clay as Red as Blood. Only one old Man, who talk’d to, and commanded, and was obey’d by them, appear’d cover’d with a Cloak of the Skins of Sea-Wolves. Fifteen Youths came out upon the open Shore, near the Sea and drawing near, with peaceable Demonstrations, very earnestly pointed, [78]lifting up their Hands towards the Place where the Ships remain’d. The Spaniards did the same. The Indians came close, and Sarmiento giving them two Towels and a Night-cap, for he had nothing else then, and the Pilots some other Trifles, they were well pleas’d. They gave them Wine, which they tasted and then threw away. They eat of the Bisket, but all this did not satisfy them; for which Reason, and because they were on an open Shore, in Danger of losing the Boat, they return’d to their Station, making Signs to the Indians to go to the Boat. They did so, and Sarmiento posted two Sentinels for the more Security, then forcibly seiz’d one of the Indians for an Interpreter, put him into his Boat, embrac’d him lovingly, cloath’d and fed him. This Place he call’d, The Point of People, as being the first where he found any. Thence he proceeded to Three small Islands, lying in a Triangle, and lay there. They went on, taking Draughts of the Lands, and being before a very craggy Country, the Indian who had never ceas’d shedding Tears, throwing off a Shirt they had put him on, leap’d over-board, and swam away. They held on their Way, quite weary of seeing so many Islands, containing strange Productions of Nature, but without any Inhabitants. Only in one of them, which they call’d, The Cleft Rock, near a deep Cave, they found much Tract of Men’s Feet, and the whole Skeleton of a Man or Woman. They went on thence with Storms through incredible Solitudes, which it would be too much to describe, tho’ our Design were to treat only of this Voyage. At another Land, where they arriv’d full of Uncertainty, as it were by Accident, in the Bay they call’d, Our Lady of Guadalupe, thinking to discover whether one Channel ran to the East, and another to the North; they saw a A Piragua. Piragua, being a Vessel made of Planks put together, without any Sides, and sometimes of Rushes, and of Calabashes, and properly a Float, coming along on the Water, and in it five Indians, who getting to the Shore, left the Piragua, and ran up a Mountain in a Consternation. The Pilot went into the Piragua, with four Soldiers, and the Boat proceeded further.

Coming to another Point, where they thought there were more People, A Cottage and what in it. they only found a low round Cottage, made of Poles, and cover’d with broad Barks of Trees, and the Skins of Sea-Wolves. In it were little Baskets, Shell-Fish, small Nets, and Bones for Sticking of Fish, like Harping Irons and Scrips full of that Red Earth wherewith they dye their Bodies, instead of Cloaths. This is all the Gayity and Habit they use, instead of the Gold and Silks worn in the Courts of Princes. Sarmiento left the Piragua, and return’d to the Ships with only the Boat, because his Provisions were spent. In this small Vessel, and a Brigantine, he found newly built by his Company, whilst they were viewing those most desart Islands, with the Advice of the Vice-Admiral, he went from the Red Harbour, and finding no other safe for the Ships, return’d to the same. Then in the Boat call’d Nuestra Senora de Guia, or Our Lady of the Guide, he went away to make Tryal of the Mouth which appear’d to the Eastward under a mighty long Ridge of Snowy Mountains, so various, that they saw some Tops cover’d with white, others with blew, and others Snow of several Colours. with black Snow. Sarmiento calls that the Continent. There is no Number of the Islands he took Possession of, and those he discover’d, being inaccessible in other Archipelagos, from the Top of a Mountain rising above [79]those about it, and cover’d with blew Snow, which he compares to the Colour of the Turky Stones. This Height he call’d Anno Nuevo, that is, New Year, because he found it on the first Day of the Year, 1580. He left no Saints Name, or the Resemblance of any natural Thing, but what he apply’d to distinguish those Islands he touch’d at, erecting Crosses on them all, and writing as he did in the first. He saw Men, only in these here mention’d.

He ran again in his Boat through those Seas, where Nature seem’d to set up new Islands every Day; and Anchor’d in a Harbour, where, among Sarmiento’s Industry. other Precautions for Navigation, he drew a Meridian Line on the Earth, and mark’d the Magnetick Needles, refreshing them by touching again, because they had receiv’d some Damage by the Storms and Damps. How weak a Guide have Men for mighty Enterprizes! He prosecuted his Discovery of little Islands, and taking Possession; and observ’d an Eclipse for the Benefit of Navigation, in the Port of Misericordia, or Mercy, as he nam’d it. The Vice-Admiral not coming to him, he suppos’d he was return’d to Lima, however he waited for him ten Days, and five more in another newly discover’d, and call’d, Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria, or Our Lady of Candlemas, three Leagues from the other. This Time having been agreed upon between them to expect one another, which when expir’d, each was to make the best of his Way into Spain; Sarmiento being positive, contrary to the Opinion of the Pilots, that there was the Streight of Magellan.

On St. Agnes’s Day he Anchor’d at the Island which forms that Harbour, for which Reason he gave it that Saint’s Name. From the Ridge of a Hill, which hangs bending like a Bow over a River, he perceiv’d five Native Indians, who with Cries and Signs desired him to come to them; the Spaniards answering them in the same Manner, the Indians held up a Indians by Signs show that Drake pass’d that Way. white Scarf, and our Men another. When they were come down to the Shore, they seem’d to request they would draw near. Sarmiento sent them his Ensign, and the Pilot Ferdinand Alonso, with only four Men, that they might not fear; however they durst not come near the Boat. One of our Men went ashore, and yet they would not trust him, yet drawing nearer because he was alone, he gave them Chaquiras, that is, Glass-Beads, Hawks-Bells, Combs, Ear-Rings, and Hempen-Cloth. Observe what mighty Designs were couch’d under those Childish Gifts. Then the Ensign and Pilot came ashore, cherishing and giving them other Toys, and show’d them what every Thing was for, by applying it to the Use before them. This pleas’d them extreamly, as did some little Linnen Flags, or Bannors, our Men carry’d, made of narrow Slips of French Linnen, Canvas, and Silesia Cloth. This made Sarmiento judge that they had before seen Europeans, and they, without being ask’d, signify’d by intelligible Tokens, that two Ships like ours had pass’d that Way, or were still thereabouts, pointing to the South East, and in them bearded Men, clad and arm’d after the same Manner. This was the first Intelligence they found of the English Ships under Drake. The Indians with smiling Countenances promis’d to come again. They went up the Land, and our Men aboard the Ship, which not being far off, Sarmiento came ashore to take Possession, with the usual Religious and Civil Ceremony.

The next Day the Ensign and Ferdinand Alonso were with six Soldiers by break of Day in the Harbour, carrying a considerable Quantity of Toys, to [80]gain the Affections of the Natives, who came also; but would not draw Spaniards catch three Indians. near our Men. They made the same Signs they had the Day before. The Spaniards to be better informed of what Course the English Steer’d, ran at the Indians, and took three of them, every two Soldiers holding one of them, and tho’ they gave our Men many Blows and Bangs, struggling to get loose, they could not prevail, and yet were very strong. The Spaniards put up all that they might get them to the Ship, where Sarmiento receiv’d, and treated them Courteously. They Eat and Drank, and Kindness so far prevail’d, that they laid aside all Fear, and Laugh’d. Being show’d the narrow Slips of Linnen, they pointed with their Hands to a Bay, where the Ships had Anchor’d, with the bearded People, who had Arrows, and Partesans. One of them show’d two, and another one Wound they had receiv’d fighting against the Men of that Fleet.

Vice-Admiral returns to Chile. The Vice-Admiral was now gone back to Chile, and among other Accidents which happen’d in his Return, he was wont to tell, that being come to Island Mocha, he sent his Boat thither to ask some supply of Provisions, and understanding how Friendly they behav’d themselves towards Drake, and that the Hatred those People bear the Spaniards might be an Obstacle to him, his Messengers, by Order, conceal’d their being such, pretending they were Lutherans. The Islanders gave Credit to the Fiction, being desirous He deceives the Indians. to gain Friends, for preserving of their Liberty. Accordingly they sent them Flesh, Bread, and Fruit, with a Letter, in answer to theirs, the Superscription thereof in English run thus, To the very Magnificent Lords, the Lutherans, in the South Sea. Our Men answer’d, That since they had supplied them with such plenty of Provisions, they desir’d they would come and partake. About 30 of the Prime Caciques accepted of the Invitation, and came very Joyfully, in a Canoe, to our Ship. No sooner were they Aboard, than the Vice-Admiral, not regarding their Complaints, gave order to loose the Sails, which were ready, and carry’d them away Prisoners to Chile. Some things that befell him, might justify his deserting his Superior, but they must be left to those who write a particular History of those Actions.

Sarmiento press’d to go back. To return to Sarmiento. In the aforesaid Port of Candelaria, or Candlemass, the Pilots press’d him hard, with Intreaties and Protestations, to do as his Vice-Admiral had done, representing how much his Men were harrass’d and his Ship disabled, and that he had done more than all the Discoverers before him. That they wanted Anchors, Cables, and Rigging; that the Winds oppos’d him, without which it was impossible to proceed. This was a Dangerous Tryal, because amidst the Complaints, and almost Threats of the Pilots, there was a mixture of Flattery, commending him, for that no other Discoverer had ventur’d so far; so that Sarmiento was no He is resolute, and goes on. less mov’d by their Praises than by their Anger. However he bore up against both, and severely check’d the Pilots: Who knows but he might conceal the same Fears they urg’d? And in short, he appear’d so Resolute against all they could say, that he brought them to his Beck. He sail’d thence, keeping the Channel, and about a League to the South-East, the Indians show’d him the way the Bearded Men took, of whom, after killing many, they, as was afterwards known, sav’d one Catherine, and a Boy, both English, who Account of Drake’s Passage. still liv’d among those wild Beasts, which they were more like than Rational Creatures. Somewhat farther in another Island, which the Indians said was call’d Puchachailgua, full of extraordinary high grey Rocks, the [81]bearded Men again fought the Natives without Success. They went on to another Island Nam’d Capitloilgua, on the Coast call’d Cayrayxaxiilgua. Sarmiento did not change the Ancient Names of Countries, when he could learn them. They were sufficiently dismay’d in the next they came at, thinking they were Imbay’d; but presently after they took Heart again, at the Sight of the Channel, which begins at the Mouth called Xaultegua, and it widen’d, bringing them out to a most spacious Sea, full of thousands of Islands. Passing by, in Sight of one of them, they perceiv’d high Smokes; and the Captive Indians began to Weep, and they saw it was for Fear of the Natives, expressing that they were Giants, and fought desperately. Our Men encourag’d them, giving them to understand that they should be able to deal with those People. They went ashore on that Country, which is call’d Tinquichisgua. Sarmiento alter’d it, in Honour of the Cross he Several Islands. erected there, calling it, the Island of the Cross. There he saw Abundance of Whales, Wolves, and other Sea-Monsters, and great Clods of Snow, on the Waves. He made ready his Cannon, and small Arms, providing against both Pirates and Natives, for he expected to find the English possessed of the Land. From that Time he stood upon his Guard, and no Man quitted his Arms. They went on to a third Island, which is the biggest, heard Humane Voices, and saw some Piraguas, with the People that cry’d out, who were crossing from one Island to another. Our Men drew near in the Boat to take a View, and all of them put into a clean Harbour, whence they discover’d a Town, not Barbarous, but Decent and Lofty, like ours in Europe, and abundance of People, who having sunk the Piraguas, Populous Islands. and standing on the Mountains, with their Arms in their Hands, call’d to our Men from a Wood, to Land, as ours did them to draw near the Sea. Among the Trees appear’d many more of those Islanders, with Bows and Arrows, as if they intended to fall on. This made our Men discharge some Muskets at them, the Noise whereof so terrify’d the Indian Women, that they set up hideous Shrieks, and therefore the Spaniards forbore Firing, for fear of losing all hopes of gaining their Affections. By this time the Ship which had been Cruizing up and down, came into the Harbour. Sarmiento made a Gun ready, and the Boat came Aboard, Towing a Piragua after it. Having writ the Instrument of Possession, tho’ he had not inquir’d into the Government of the Inhabitants of that great Town, he Landed on the Shore, whence is discover’d a vast high Mountain, all white with aged Snow, and encompass’d with Rocks. Ancient Relations call’d it Orlanro’s Bell, he being one of Magellan’s Companions. He Sail’d on to 54 Degrees Latitude, at the Point he call’d of S. Isidorus. Near to it the Natives call’d out to him, and coming up to our Men, Embrac’d them familiarly. Tractable Indians. Sarmiento, besides Hawks-Bels, and other Toys, sent them Bisket and Flesh from the Ships. They sat down to Converse, by Signs, with the Ensign, the Pilot, and Eight other Christians, signifying, that they were pleas’d with their Friendship, and those rich Gifts; and gave such confuse Tokens of the English having pass’d that way, as the others had done. Then they return’d to their Huts, and the Admiral having taken Possession, and found the Latitude to be 53 Degrees, and 40 Minutes, advanc’d in sight of the Coast, which eight Leagues from thence lies flat with the Sea, and forms a Shore of white Sand. Before he came to it he Discover’d a prodigious high burning Mountain, cover’d with Snow; where the Fire and [82]the Snow seem, out of natural Courtesy, to Respect one another, and to confine within themselves their Force, and Effects; for neither is the one Quench’d, nor the other Melted by their near Neighbourhood. The Channel carry’d him to the Point he call’d of S. Anne, in 53 Degrees and a half of Latitude. He took possession, and rais’d a heap of Stones, at the Foot of a Cross, and left a Letter written with Charcole-Dust, which he thought incorruptible, in the Shards of an Earthen Vessel, well Pitch’d, among those Stones. In it he declared to all Nations, That those Lands and Seas belong’d to the King of Spain, and by what Title he held them. In the same Letter, he left Orders for his Vice-Admiral, to return to Peru, and give the Viceroy an Account of all that happen’d, till they discover’d the Streight. Indian Presents. The Ship steer’d off with the Ebb, and the Indians when it was gone came down with their Wives and Children, and a Present of great pieces of Sea Wolves, stinking Meat, Sea Foul, call’d Minnos, which are White and Yellowish, Murtina, a sort of Fruit like Cherries, and bits of Flint, bor’d through and Painted, in a small Box of Gold and Silver. Being ask’d, what that was for, and they answering, To strike Fire, one of them took some Feathers he brought, and with them lighted it, as if it were Tinder. A little before, when our Men made a Fire to melt the Pitch, for securing the Vessel the Letter was in, which was left stopp’d at the Foot of the Cross, the Flame spread upon the Mountain, and rais’d a Smoke. The Indians believing they were Fires made by those so much dreaded Enemies of theirs, went away and could not be stopp’d by any means; nor was their Fear groundless, for they answer’d immediatly in the opposite Island, with great Smokes. The River which falls into the Sea at the Point Sarmiento call’d S. John’s; and the Streight dividing these Islands, which is the very Old one of Magellan, look’d and sought after with so much Danger, he nam’d of The Mother of God, changing its first Appellation, that through this Devotion she may obtain of her Son the Salvation of those numberless Provinces, extending the Voice of his Gospel to them, that it might reach the Ears of so many Souls, most of which are Ignorant of their own Immortality, without knowing any more than common Nature has taught them.

Possession taken. Sarmiento was so well pleas’d with having thus express’d his Devotion, that when he return’d to Spain, he intreated the Kings, to direct that Streight to be generally so call’d, and his Majesties Orders. The Possession of this so remarkable Place was taken with extraordinary Joy, inserting in the Instrument the Clause of Pope Alexander the 6th’s Bull, the Title that gives the Kings of Castile, and the Limits assigned by the Line he drew through both the Poles of the World, as Gods Vicar. F. Guadramiro said Mass, and they all heard it devoutly, considering it was the first offer’d up in that Place by Man to his Creator. It was intended as a Thanksgiving, and they all took Courage to undertake any difficult Enterprize. They saw the Track of Tigers, and Lions, and also White and Grey Parrots, with Red Heads; and they heard the sweet Notes of Goldfinches, and other Birds. Holding on their Course along the Channel, with excessive hot Weather, they came into a Bay, that was cover’d with white Weeds, and Anchor’d at the Point, on which a Company of Giants immediatly appear’d, who call’d out to them, lifting up their Hands Unarm’d; our Men imitated their Actions, which denoted Peace on both sides. They being come to the Boat, which was Guarded by ten Musketeers, the Ensign leap’d Ashore, [83]with four others. The Giants made Signs to him to lay down his Leading-Staff, and then they withdrew, to the place where they had hid their Bows and Arrows. The Ensign did as they directed, and then shew’d them the Toys and Gifts he design’d for them. This withheld them, but still they were jealous, wherefore our Men supposing their jealousy proceeded from what they had suffer’d before, and guessing they had receiv’d some dammage from the English Pyrate, to be the better enform’d of it, ten of our men fell upon one of the Giants, whom they took; but had enough to A Giant Taken. do to secure him. The others running to their Arms, return’d so quick upon the Spaniards, that they had scarce time to get into their Boat. They shot their Arrows, which flying thick, and our Men taking care to avoid them, they dropt two Muskets. The Steward of the Ship was shot in the Eye with an Arrow. The Indian they took was a Giant even among the other Giants, and the Relation says, he look’d to them like one of the Cyclops. Other Relations assure us, each of these Giants is above three Yards high, and they are proportionably spread and brawny. Being brought into the Ship, he was extraordinary melancholy, and tho’ they offer’d him the best they had to Eat, he would take nothing all that Day. They set Sail, crossing Channels, and passing by Islands, in most of which they saluted them with Smokes. In the narrowest Part, which they call’d of Our Lady of Grace, through which they must pass of Necessity, and is Other Indians. in 53 Degrees and a half Latitude, Sarmiento was of Opinion, Forts might be erected on the two Capes to secure the Passage. They made haste thro’ it, and again saw the Natives on another Point of Land, calling out, and shaking their Cloaks, or Woolly Blankets. Sarmiento went to them with eighteen Soldiers. Only four Indians appear’d with Bows and Arrows, and making Signs of Peace with their Hands, said, Xiitote, which, as was afterwards known, signifies Brothers. They posted themselves on a rising Ground, and when the Spaniards were landed, made Signs to them for one of our Men to come to them. One went unarm’d, with some Gifts, as Glass-Beads, Hawks-Bels and Combs, which they receiv’d pointing to him to go down again. He did so, and the Ensign went up in his stead, obliging them with other Presents. They accepted of them, and yet neither they, nor any Courtesie could dispel their Jealousie. Sarmiento left them, to avoid provoking them, and going up the Mountain another way, to view the Ridge, Plains, and Channels, the four Archers appear’d before him, and without any Provocation receiv’d, but on the contrary after receiving the aforesaid Gifts, they furiously assaulted our Men, wounding the General with two Arrows in the Side, and betwixt his Eyes; and another Soldier had an Eye put out. The rest of the Spaniards covering themselves with their Bucklers ran at them, but the Giants fled up the Country so swiftly, that a Musket Ball would scarce over-take them. This Action seems to verifie the Cowardice the Authors of Fabulous Books, commonly call’d Romances, ascribe to their Giants. Sarmiento view’d the Land, call’d it Nuestra Senora del Valle, or Our Lady of the Vale, discovering betwixt two spacious Ridges, some delightful Plains, numerous Towns, lofty Buildings, Towers and Pinacles, and to his Thought sumptuous Temples of so Majestick an Appearance, that he scarce believ’d his own Eyes, and judg’d it an imaginary City.

The End of the Third Book

