---
heading: Book 6b
linkTitle: Book 6b
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


Camboxa is one of the most fertile of the Indian Regions. It sends Camboxa described. Abundance of Provisions to other Parts, for which Reason it is frequented by Spaniards, Persians, Arabs, and Armenians. The King is a Mahometan; but his Subjects the Gusarats and Banians, follow the Precepts of Pythagoras, perhaps without any Knowledge of him. 

They are all sharp witted, Opinions of the Natives. and reputed the cunningest Merchants in India. However they are of Opinion, that after Death, Men, Brute Beasts, and all Creatures, receive either Punishment, or Reward; so confus’d a Notion have they of Immortality. The City Camboxa, which gives its Name to all the Country, is also call’d [143]Champa, abounding in the Odoriferous Calambuco Wood, whose Tree call’d Calamba, grows in unknown Regions, and therefore has not been seen standing.

The Floods upon those great Rivers bring down Trunks of it, and Lignum Aloes. this is the precious Lignum Aloes. Camboxa produces Corn, Rice, Pease, Butter, and Oyl. There are made in it various Sorts of Cotton Webs, Muslins, Buckrams, Calicoes, white and painted, Dimities, and other curious Manufactures. Pieces exceeding the finest in Holland.

They also adorn their Rooms with Carpets; tho’ they are not like those brought out of Persia to Ormuz. They weave others for the common Sort, which they call Bancales, not unlike the Scotch Plads. Nor do they want the Art of Silk-Weaving, for they both weave, and work with the Needle, rich Hangings, Coverings for the low Chairs us’d by the Women of Quality, and for the Indian Litters, or Palanquines, which are made of Ivory, and Tortoise-Shell, and of the same they make Chess-Boards, and Tables to Play, Seal-Rings, and other portable Things. 

In the Mountains there is found a sort of Christal, extraordinary Product. transparent, whereof they make Beads, little Idols, Bracelets, Necklaces, and other Toys. It abounds in Amethists, Garnets, the Sort of Saphirs call’d Hyacinths, Spinets, Cornelians, Chrysolites, Cats Eyes, properly call’d Acates, all of them precious Stones; There are also those they call Milk, and Blood Stones, pleasant, and medicinal Fruits, Opium, Bangue, Sanders, Alom and Sugar.

Indigo is incomparably prepar’d in Camboxa, and thence sent to several Provinces. The living Creatures are the same Asia affords in those Parts, Elephants, Lions, Horses, wild Boars, Beasts. and other fierce Beasts. It is in Ten Degrees of North Latitude. The River Mecon waters all the Kingdom, and in it falls into the Sea; being look’d upon as the greatest in India, carrying so much water in Summer, that it Mecon River. floods, and covers the Fields, like the Nile in Egypt. It joyns another of less Stock, at the Place call’d Chordemuco. This River, for six Months runs backward.

The Reason of it is the Extent and Plainness of the Country it runs along. The Southern Breezes choak up the Bar with Sand. The Currents thus damm’d up, swell and rise together, after much Struggling one against the other. The Bar looks to the South-ward, both Waters at first Form a deep Bay, and finding no free Passage out, but being drove by the mighty Violence of the Winds, are forc’d to submit and bend their Course the wrong Way, till a more favourable Season restores them to their natural Course. We see some such like Effects in Spain, where the Tagus falls into the Sea of Portugal, and the Guadalquivir into that of Andaluzia, oppos’d by the superior Force of the Sea Waves, and of the Winds.

About this Time, in the remotest Part of this Country, beyond impenetrable Angon City Discover’d. Woods, not far from the Kingdom of the Laos, was discover’d a City, of above six thousand Houses, now call’d Angon. The Structures, and Streets, all of massy Marble Stones, artificially wrought, and as entire, as if they had been modern Works. The Wall strong, with a Scarp, or Slope within, in such Manner, that they can go up to the Battlements Its Magnificence. every where. Those Battlements all differ one from another, representing sundry Creatures, one represents the Head of an Elephant, another of a Lion, a third of a Tiger, and so proceed in continual Variety. 

The Ditch, which is also of hew’d Stones, is capable of receiving Ships. Over it is a magnificent Bridge, the Arches of it being supported by stone [144]Giants of a prodigious Height. The Aqueducts, tho’ dry, show no less Grandeur. There are Remains of Gardens, and delightful Places, where the Aqueducts terminate. On one Side of the Town is a Lake above thirty Leagues in Compass. There are Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and Characters not understood. Many Buildings are more sumptuous than the rest, most of them of Alabaster, and Jasper Stone. In all this City, when first discoverred by the Natives, they found no People, nor Beasts, nor any living Creatures, except such as Nature produces out of the Breaches of Ruins.

I own I was unwilling to write this, and that I have look’d upon it as an imaginary City of Plato’s Atlantis, and of that his Common-Wealth; but there is no wonderful Thing, or Accident, that is not subject to much Doubt. It is now Inhabited, and our Religious Men, of the Order of St. Augustin and St. Dominick, who have Preach’d in those Parts, do testify the Truth of it. A Person of Reputation for his Learning, conjectures it was the Work of the Emperor Traian; but tho’ he extended the Empire more than his Predecessors, I have not ever Read that he reach’d as far as Camboxa. 

Were the Histories of the Chineses as well known as ours, they would inform us, why they abandon’d so great a Part of the World; they would explain the Inscriptions on the Buildings, and all the rest that is unknown to the Natives themselves. I know not what to say of so Beautiful a City’s being buried in Oblivion, or not known. It is rather a Subject of Admiration than Reflection.

Three Spanish Ships sent to the Relief of Camboxa. Don Lewis being zealous to bring those Nations into the Bosom of the Church, and their Wealth, and Kings under the Subjection of the Crown of Spain, fitted out three Ships, under the Command of John Xuarez Gallinato, born at Tenerife, one of the Canary Islands, with 120 Spaniards, and some Philippines. 

They Sail’d from Cebu, but there rose a Storm immediately, which dispers’d the Ships. Gallinato drove on by the Fury of the Winds, arriv’d at Malaca, and the other two at Camboxa. Going up the River, King of Camboxa routed by him of Siam. they were Inform’d, That the King of Sian had defeated him of Camboxa, his Neighbour; who, with the wretched Remains of his Army, fled into the Kingdom of the Laos, a Neighbouring but Inhumane Nation; and that, whilst he was begging Compassion among those obdurate Hearts, the King of Sian had set up Prauncar, Nick-nam’d, Wry Mouth the Traytor, Brother to the vanqush’d Monarch, for King of Camboxa. This Accident did not obstruct the Succours which the Spaniards carry’d under Colour of an Embassy.

They came to the City Chordumulo, 80 Leagues distant from the Bar, and leaving 40 Spaniards in the Ships, 40 others went to the Country where the new King was. They made Application to visit him presently, but he would not be seen that Day, tho’ he order’d they should have good Quarters, and be told, he would give them Audience three Days after. But James Veloso and Blase Ruyz, either that they were formerly acquainted Design to murder the Spaniards. with the Country, or some new Subtilty occurring, looking on that delay as suspicious, visiting a beautiful Indian Woman, of the King’s Family, she told them in private, That being admitted into that Tyrants Secrets, he being fond of her, she knew he intended to Murder them all; and that during those three Days he had assign’d them, as it were to Rest, after their Journey, the Men and Means for Executing that Design were to be provided. The Spaniards return’d Thanks for the Intelligence, not without promise of Reward. [145]

Desperat Bravery of the Spaniards. They were not dismay’d at the Danger; but repeating their Thanks to the Indian Woman, for her Intelligence, came to this magnanimous, if it may not be term’d a rash Resolution. They agreed to attack the King’s Palace that same Night, and to withstand the whole Army, if Need were. They prepar’d themselves for that Enterprize, which was above human Strength, set fire to the House where the Powder lay, and the People running to help, or to see the Mischief, the Spaniards, during the Confusion, enter’d the Palace, and being acquainted with the royal Apartments, made through them, till they came to the King’s Person, whom they run thro’, and kill’d They kill the King of Camboxa. after cutting his Guards in Pieces. He defended himself, calling out for Help, but those who came to his Assistance found him bloodless. The Report of this Action alarm’d the other Guards, and then all the City, which contains above thirty thousand Inhabitants, who where all running to Arms; above 14000 Men took up such as Occasion offer’d, and came upon the Spaniards with many war-like Elephants. Our two Commanders drew up Retire before 14000 Indians. their little Body, and retir’d in great Order, always fighting and killing great numbers of their Enemies. The Fight lasted all the Night, with wonderful Bravery, the next Day they got to their Ships, and imbark’d, leaving that Kingdom full of new Divisions.

The second Day after, Gallinato came in, with his Ship. He landed, having Gallinato at Camboxa.been before inform’d of what had happen’d, and thinking he did not perform his Duty, unless he succour’d the Spaniards, when he heard the Drums and Bells, and saw the Streets and Port full of trading People, now in Arms. He gave strict Orders to those that attended him, to behave themselves very modestly, so as to conceal their own Concern, and deceive the People of Camboxa, both by their Looks, and the Sedateness of their Words.

The principal Men of Camboxa visited him, in peaceable Manner; whom he treated very courteously. He might have perform’d some great Exploit, but finding his Strength too small for such an Enterprize, and that now Affairs had taken another Turn, and were in a different Posture, he thought fit to be gone. Most of those great Men oppos’d it, promising him the Crown, as being well affected to the Spaniards, and a foreign Government. The great Men offer him the Crown. Hence came the idle Report, that Gallinato was King of Camboxa, which was believ’d by many in Spain, and acted on the Stage with Applause, and good Liking. And it was the Opinion of Persons well acquainted with those Countries, that had Gallinato laid hold of the Opportunity offer’d him, he might then have possess’d himself of Camboxa, and united it to the Crown of Castile.

I have seen Letters of Velloso, and Blase Ruiz, to the Council at Manila, after this Action, wherein they speak to this Effect, and complain that Gallinato should blame what they did. But Gallinato, whose Judgment, and Valour, had been try’d in the greatest Dangers of those Eastern Parts, and many Years before in Flanders, would not suffer himself to be easily The depos’d King’s Son restor’d. led away by popular Affection, and honourably rejecting that Opportunity, sail’d towards Manila. He took in some Refreshment in Cochinchina. Blase Ruiz and James Velloso had landed there before, and went alone by Land to the Kingdom of the Laos, which lies West of Cochinchina, to seek out the depos’d King Langara, and restore him to his Throne. They found he was dead, but had a Son living, who being told how they had kill’d the [146]Usurper, his Uncle and Enemy; he set forward immediately for his Kingdom with Velloso and Ruiz, and 10000 Men, the King of the Laos, contrary to all Expectation furnish’d him. He attack’d Camboxa, where Ruiz and Velloso faithfully stuck to him during the War, and afterwards in his Government. Then he sent another Embassy to the Philippine Island, asking Supplies of Men to quell the Troubles in his Country, and that he and his Subjects might receive the Faith of JESUS CHRIST; promising a considerable Part of his Dominions to the Spaniards, to subsist them. This Embassy came to Manila, when Don Lewis had quitted the Government, and resign’d it up to Don Francis Tello, which gave Occasion to Ternate to grow more settled in its Tyranny.

D. Pedro de Acunna fortifies Carthagena. Don Pedro de Acunna, who govern’d Carthagena in the West-Indies, in this Year 1595, either because it was his natural Inclination, or the Necessity of the Times requiring it, fortify’d the Place with Fascines, Planks, Piles, and Ditches, working at it himself in Person. Thus he oblig’d the Bishop, Clergy and Religious Men, to put their Hands to the Work; the very Ladies of Quality, their Daughters and Maids, did not refuse to follow such an Example. It was wonderful to see with what Expedition and Zeal the Work was brought to Perfection, of such Force is a good Example. Soon after came to Puerto Rico, the Ship call’d Pandorga, or Borgonna, that was Admiral of Tierra Firme, and New Spain, with three Millions in her. The whole under the Care of the General Sancho Pardo.

56 English Sail sent to rob the West-Indies. At this Time there came into the West-Indies a Fleet of 56 Sail, sent by the Queen of England to plunder them, under the Command of John Hawkins and Francis Drake. Captain Peter Tello defended the three Millions so bravely with the Spanish Frigots, that he sav’d the Prize. Hawkins was wounded in the Fight, and dy’d of it before he could come to the Firm Land. Drake, with that Fleet, enter’d Rio de la Hacha and Santa Maria; and being one Night in Sight of Carthagena, took a Frigate belonging to that Coast, by which he was inform’d, how well the Governour had fortifi’d it; therefore making a Compliment of Necessity, he sent Don Pedro a Message by the Men of his Frigot, whom he therefore set at Liberty, saying, He did not attack his Works and City out of Respect to him, and because he honour’d his Valour. The Truth of the Matter was, That Drake call’d together his Captains to consult what was to be done, and they all advis’d him to attack the City, promising to do their utmost, and be answerable for the Success; alledging it ought to be attempted, for being a Place of vast Wealth and Consequence. Only Drake oppos’d it, Drake’s Actions there. strength’ning his Opinion by saying, His Mind did not give him, that the Enterprize could have the Success they would assure him, because they were to have to do with a Knight of Malta, a Batchelor, nothing weakned with Womanish Affection, or the Care of Children; but watchful, and intent upon defending the Place, and so Resolute, that he would dye on the Spot before he would lose it. This Opinion prevail’d, and the English standing in Awe of Don Pedro’s Reputation, went away to the Town of Nombre de Dios, and took it. Drake afterwards designing to do the same at Panama, was disappointed, meeting Opposition by the Way, which had been provided upon the Advice sent by Don Pedro, that the English were moving against that City. [147]

But let us return into Asia. Still the People of Camboxa persisted to ask Succours at the Philipine Islands, upon the usual Promise of Conversion and Vassalage. Don Lewis de las Marinhas undertook the Enterprize in Person, D. Lewis de las Marinhas goes to relieve Camboxa. and at his own Cost. He set out from Manila with Don James Jordan, an Italian, Don Pedro de Figueroa, Peter Villestil, and Ferdinand de los Rios Coronel, Spanish Commanders, the last of them then a Priest, who had also been in the first War of Camboxa. A Storm took them out at Sea, which lasted three Days, with the usual Fury. The Shipwrack was miserable, two Ships were stav’d in Pieces, and the Sea swallow’d up all the Men, Provisions and Ammunition. Of all the Soldiers and Seamen on Board the Vice-Admiral, only five swam ashore on the Coast of China. Some Soldiers were also sav’d out of the Admiral, and among them Captain Ferdinand de los Rios, the Vessel remaining founder’d under the Waves. The other Ship got to Camboxa almost shatter’d to Pieces after Is cast away. many Dangers. She found in the River of Camboxa, eight Juncks of Malayes, and the Spaniards seeing they design’d to carry away some Slaves of the King of Camboxa, to whose Assistance they came, inconsiderately boarded the Malayes, who being well furnish’d with more than ordinary Fire-works, soon burnt our Ship, and most of the Spaniards perish’d in the Spanish Ships burnt. Flames or Smoke. Blaze Ruiz, nor Velloso were not there at that Time, but soon after in the Country, where they were attending the King, being beset in the House where they lodg’d, were barbarously murder’d. Those few Spaniards that escap’d, got into the Kingdom of Sian, and thence to Manila. Heaven was pleas’d this should be the End of all those mighty Preparations made for the Recovery of Ternate, and the other Molucco Islands, whose Tyrant triumph’d at the News, concluding it was the Effect of his good Fortune, and looking on it as a Testimony of the Justice of his Cause, and accordingly he confederated a new with our Enemies.

Don Francisco Tello, a Gentleman of Andaluzia, succeeded Gomez Perez D. Fran. Tello Governor of the Phil. in the Government of the Philippine Islands, and came to Manila in the Year 1596. His first Care was to inform himself of the Condition his Predecessor had left them in, and to supply the Garrisons; because the Emperor of Japan, having in the Year 1595, executed those glorious Martyrdoms, the Memory whereof is still fresh, on the Religious Men of the Order of S. Francis, it gave him Jealousy, that he might have a Design against the Philippine Islands.

The Natives of the Islands of Mindanao, hate our Nation as much as People of Mindanao hate the Spaniards. those of Ternate, and upon any Occasion take Arms against it, as they did in the last, at the said Island of Ternate. For this Reason, Stephen Rodriguez de Figueroa enter’d into Articles with the new Governour. Don Francisco Tello, by Virtue whereof he made War on the People of Mindanao and Ternate, at his own Expence. Stephen Rodriguez was so rich, Stephen Rodriguez makes War on Mindanao, at his own Expence. that he might safely undertake this Affair. He liv’d at Arevalo, a Town on the Island Panaz, one of the Philippines, and set out with some Galleys, Frigots, Champanes, and one Ship, in which there were some Spaniards, and above 1500 of the Painted Natives, call’d Pintados, who were to serve as Pioneers. He arriv’d at the River of Mindanao, on the 20th of April, 1596, and as soon as the Inhabitants of the Town, peculiarly call’d Mindanao, saw such a sightly Company, they fled up the Side of [148]the River, abandoning the Place, to the Fury of the Soldiers. Most of them resorted to the Town of Buyahen, then the Residence of Raxamura, King of Mindanao, who being under Age, had yet no Charge of the Government, which was wholly in the Hands of Silonga, a Soldier, and Commander of Reputation. Our Men following up the River, came to Tampacan, five Leagues from the first. That Place was govern’d by Dinguilibot, Uncle to Monao, the true Proprietor, who was then also young.

These two were naturally well affected to the Spaniards, and therefore, as soon as they discover’d their Arms, came out, in peaceable Manner, to meet, The Natives fly, and he pursues. and offer them their Assistance. They inform’d them, that the Enemies, for they were so to those of Buyahen, had retir’d into the Fort they had there. Stephen Rodriguez hearing the News, and having made much of those Princes, order’d the Fleet to weigh Anchor, and continue the Pursuit, four Leagues farther, still along the River, to Buyahen. Being come thither, he landed his Men on S. Mark’s Day; which was done by the Col. John de Xara, but without any Order, because having had no Engagement at Mindanao, they thought they should have little to do there; as if this, or any other Pretence ought to be an Excuse for not observing Martial Discipline, Stephen Rodriguez would land to rectify that Disorder by his Presence. He went out in such Armour of Proof, that a Shot of a small Drake would scarce pierce it. Only his Head unarm’d, but cover’d with a Cap and Feather, a black carrying his Helmet, and five Soldiers well arm’d attending him. He had scarce march’d fifty Paces, before an Indian, whose Name was Ubal, suddenly rush’d out of a close and topping Thicket, and running Is kill’d. at him, with his Campilan, or Cymiter, clove his Head. Ubal was Brother to Silonga, and Owner of one only Cow there was in all that Country. He kill’d her three Days before this Accident, and inviting his Friends to her, promis’d in that War to kill the most noted Man among the Spaniards. He was as good as his Word, for Stephen Rodriguez dropt down of the Wound, and dy’d three Days after, without answering one Word to the Questions that were made him, tho’ he did it by Signs. The five Spaniards, seeing their Commander so suddenly wounded, that the Slayer, appeared, and the Stroke was heard the same Moment, fell upon Ubal and cut him in Pieces. They acquainted Colonel Xara with their General’s Death; A Fort erected in Mindanao and call’d New Murcia. and he suppressing his Concern, drew back the Men, and threw up a Fortification in the most convenient Place, near the River, where he orderly founded his Colony, to be inhabited by our Men. He appointed Aldermen, and Magistrates, calling it New Murcia, in Honour of the old one in Spain, where he was born. Afterwards, designing to marry Donna Ana de Oseguera, Widow to Stephen Rodriguez, he left Things unsettled, and arriv’d at the Island Luzon about the Beginning of June.

The Governor Don Francis Tello, who was then at the Place call’d El Embocadero, an hundred Leagues from Manila, being inform’d of what had happen’d, and told upon what design the Colonel Xara came, seiz’d him immediately, Cap. Miranda sent to Mindanao. sending Captain Toribio de Miranda, to the War in Mindanao. He found his Men were retire’d to the Port de la Caldera, in the same Island but 36 Leagues from the Mouth of the River. There he maintain’d himself, till about August Don Francis Tello appointed Don John Ronquillo, who was Commander of the Galleys, to succeed in that Post. He also [149]commission’d Peter Arceo Covarrubias, and others, as Captains, to go with him; James Chaves Cannizares, Collonel; Garcia Guerrero, Major; and Christopher Villagra and Cervan Gutierrez, Captains of Foot. Don John Ronquillo came with his Recruit to press upon the Enemy, and did it so effectually, that being distress’d, they crav’d Aid of the King of Ternate, to whom the People of Mindanao pay an Acknowledgement, which is little less, or the same as Tribute. Buizan, Brother to Silonga, went on this Embassy; Ternates Succour Mindanao. and succeeded so well, that the King of Ternate sent with him seven Carcoas, x heavy Pieces of Cannon, two smaller, some Falconets, and six hundred Men. They sailing up the River of Mindanao, design’d to pass on as far as Buyahen; but met with great Difficulties at the Reaches; because at one of them they were threatned by the Spaniards chief Fort, the Galleys, and other Vessels; and the other was a narrow Channel, with a Point running out into it, on which was erected a Bastion, defended by forty Men. From thence our Men had artificially laid a strong wooden Bridge over to the other Side of the River, close to which a Galliot ply’d up and down.

The Ternates seeing both Sides so well Guarded, resolv’d to fortify themselves at the Mouth of the River. They accordingly erected a small They build a Fort on the River. Fort, and put themselves into it, with an equal Number of Mindanao Soldiers. The News hereof mov’d the General Ronquillo to dislodge them; and in Order to it, came down with the Galleys and other Vessels, and 140 Men well appointed. He landed with 116, and the Captains Ruy Gomez Arellano, Garcia Guerrero, Christopher Villagra, and Alonso de Palma, facing the Enemy, at about eighty Paces Distance, on the Bank of the River. The Ternates and Mindanaos had levell’d all the Front of their Fort, and designedly left a Spot of Bushes and Brambles on one Side, where 300 Ternates lay in Ambush, the rest being in the Fort. Both their Parties perceiving how few of our Men came to attack them, were asham’d to be shut up within Fortifications, and lye in Ambush, and accordingly making Show of haughty Threats, came out and met the Spaniards. They found such Opposition, that without the Help of any Stratagem, or other Cause but their natural Valour, at the very first onset, almost all the Ternates were kill’d, Slaughter of Ternates. and the rest fled. Our Men follow’d the Chace, till they made an End of them. The people of Tampaca, who till then had been Neuters, to see which Side Fortune would favour, perceiving she declar’d for us, took up Arms for our Part. Only seventy seven escap’d dangerously wounded, whereof fifty were drown’d in the River leaping, into it in Despair: Of the other twenty seven, only three surviv’d, who carry’d the News to their Only three escape. King. The Spaniards possess’d themselves of the Shipping, Cannon, and Plunder of the vanquish’d, and were encourag’d to prosecute the War.

Don Francis Tello did not neglect other Affairs of this Nature. He understood by his Spyes, and it was bruited abroad, that the Emperor of Japan Warlike preparations in Japan. was gathering a mighty Army, and fitted out a Fleet for it, with Arms and Provisions. It was also known, that he was in Treaty to secure himself against the Chineses, of whom the Japoneses are naturally Jealous. Hence it was inferr’d, that he arm’d to carry the War out of his own Dominions. He had already enter’d into Allyance with the King of Ternate, and other Neighbours, who were Enemies to the Crown of Spain. All [150]these Particulars gave vehement Cause to conjecture, that the Storm threatned the Philippine Islands, and more especially Manila, the Head of them. The Governour strengthned himself, and sent Captain Alderete to discover the whole Truth, under Colour of complimenting that Emperour, and carrying A Spanish Embassy thither. him a Present. The Embassador set out for Japan in July, and at the same Time Don Francisco dispatch’d the Galeon S. Philip for New Spain, with Advice of those Reports. These two Ships, viz. that Alderete went in, and the S. Philip, were together in Japan, which the Natives were jealous of. Alderete got full Information of the Strength and Designs of the Japoneses, and his Industry was of Use, for the taking of right Measures in Manila, and to prevent their fearing without Cause. He brought back another noble Present to the Governour; and both Sides stood upon their Guard, to be ready upon all Occasions.

Sovereign Court at Manila. In the Year 1598, the sovereign Court was again erected at Manila, King Philip prudently conferring Dignity on that Province. It was compos’d of the Iudges Zambrano, Mezcoa, Tellez de Almazan, and the Kings Attorney Jerome Salazar, y Salcedo. That great King never allow’d of any Intermission in his weighty Cares, which extended to all the known Parts of the World; having a watchful Eye upon the Designs of other Princes, whether well, or ill affected to the Propagation of the Gospel, which was his main Design. Therefore, about this Time, he made Haste to rid himself of his neighbouring Enemies, that he might have Leasure to attend the remotest Rebels against the Church and his Monarchy. And in Respect that as Peace between France & Spain. Age came on, its Distempers grew heavier, he concluded a Peace with France, which was proclaim’d at Madrid, with Martial Solemnity, after he had withdrawn himself to the Monastery of S. Laurence, at the Escurial, K. Philip the 2d dies. a Work of his Piety and Magnificence, where he dy’d on the thirteenth of September 1598, with singular Tokens of Sanctity. He frequented the Sacrament of Confession, receiv’d the divine Viaticum, and extreme Unction, the last Remedy for temporal, and eternal Health. His Death was in all Respects answerable to the wonderful Course of his Life.

King Philip the Third.

King Philip 3rd succeeded him.

Many presented the new King with Protestations of Loyalty, before they had receiv’d Letters and Advice of his being upon the Throne. 

The same Unanimity was found in the Fleet, and Naval Power, wherein the Treasures and Commodities are transported; a rare Tranquility upon the Change of Princes. The Roman Legions in Germany, and Illyricum, did not show such Respect to Tyberius, after the Death of Augustus. Greatness of the Spanish Monarchy. 

The Spanish Monarchy is of so great an Extent, that it borders on the unknown World, and it is never Night in all Parts of it, because the [151]Sun encompasses and continually displays his Light over it, yet it obey’d without any Commotion, or rather with Pride, as if it knew and were sensible of the new Hand that took up the Reins of Government.

Excellent Princes have seldom fail’d to employ extraordinary Ministers about their Persons, to manage and sustain the Burden their Fortune lays upon their Shoulders; so Alexander the Great had Hephestion; the two Scipios, the two Lelij; Augustus Cæsar, Marcus Agrippa; the Princes of the August House of Austria, other Persons of singular Virtue; for all moral Wisdom, and Experience it self teaches us, that the Difficulties of weighty Affairs are not to be duly manag’d, and surmounted, by any but Persons of a more than ordinary Capacity; because Nature has not left any of its Works destitute of a proportionable Ministry. 

And considering, that it is of great Importance to the publick Welfare, to contrive, that what is necessary for the Use and Commerce of Mankind may appear eminent in Dignity, for the strengthning of the common Advantage with Authority: The King, I say, following those ancient Examples, made Choice of Don Francisco de Rojas y Sandoval, then Marques of Denia, and since first Duke of Lerma, a most Duke of Lerma Prime Minister. able Minister, privately to consult with him about fundamental Matters and Concerns, for which he had been prepar’d with singular Affection in those Times: Besides the great Antiquity of his Family, which has ally’d him to all the noblest of the Grandees of Spain, all Men own him endow’d with the necessary Virtues, that belong to a Person in so great a Post; which shine through that pleasing Gravity of his Countenance, with a stay’d Gayity that testifies his Capacity, and provokes Respect at the same Time that it gains Affections. He constituted him the first of his Council of State, and all the Orders for Peace and War began to run through his Hands. All the Opinions of Councels, which he found seal’d, for King Philip the 2d to give his Decision thereupon, he restor’d, without opening them, to the Presidents of the said Councels they came from, being, perhaps, calculated out of Respect, that they might again debate upon them with more Liberty, and send them back enlarg’d or reform’d.

Heaven was now hastening the Reduction of the Molucco Islands, and the Neglect of the Moluccos in Spain. punishing the Persecution of the faithfull, tho the Tyrants appear’d never so haughty; however the Talk of it was discontinu’d for some Time; because the Enterprize was to be concerted, and carry’d on in the Philippine Islands, and to be resolv’d on, and encourag’d in the supreme Council of the Indies, and it was requisite that the President and Councellors should be well affected to the Cause, which had then no Body to support it, as being despair’d of by Reason of so many unfortunate Attempts: and therefore the Papers of Reflections, and Informations relating to it, lay by, forgotten, in Heaps. This was the Posture of those Affairs till Providence dispos’d the Means for bringing it about, that a Matter which was difficult on so many several Accounts, might fall into the Hands of a Sovereign, who being well affected, might with special Zeal bring it to Perfection.

No Body now disturb’d the King of Ternate. The English settled on his Lands, and Trade enrich’d the Sovereign and the Subjects. He, tho’ he had many Sons, and the Prince his Successor was of Age to bear Arms, did not cease equally to increase his Wives and Concubines. Lust was never circumscrib’d by any Laws among those People. The Relations of curious Persons inform us, That among the rest of this Kings Wives, there was [152]Queen of Ternate in Love with the Kings Son. one very young, and singular for Beauty, with whom the Prince her Son-in-Law, whose Name was Gariolano fell in Love, and she rejected not his Courtship tho’ she was Wife to his Father: But that Nearness of Blood secur’d their Familiarity, and under the Shelter, and Cover of it, she admitted both Father and Son.

Sangiack of Sabubu Father to her. This Queen was Daughter to the Sangiack of Sabubu, a potent Prince in the great Island Batochina, who came to Ternate, upon some slight Occasion. He being lodged in the Palace, and entertain’d as a Father, and Father-in-Law, easily saw into the Incestuous Life of his Daughter. He resolv’d to be thoroughly convinc’d, yet concealing his Jealousy from both the Lovers, he was satisfy’d of the Truth, learnt who were the Parties privy to it, abhorr’d the Baseness, and condemn’d his own Blood. 

He pretended one day he would Dine in private, and sent only for his Daughter; who being free He Poisons her. from all Jealousy or Suspition, swallow’d a Poison, which soon took away her Life, in that Food which she us’d most to delight in. Endeavours were us’d to help the unhappy Queen, and compose the Father; but he angrily obstructing that last act of Compassion, put away the Physitians, and Women, and being left alone with the King, who, upon hearing the News, was come to give his Assistance, said, This Woman, whom Nature gave to me for a Daughter, and I to you for a Wife, has, with her Life, satisfy’d a Debt she had contracted by her inordinate Passions. Do not Lament her, or believe she dy’d of any Natural Distemper. I killd her, taking the Revenge off your Hands. The Prince, your Son, had a Love Intrigue with her?

Being in your House I had full Proof of it, and not being able to endure, that my Blood should wrong you, I could lay aside all Fatherly Affection, and take away the Stain that on my Side is laid upon the Law of Nature, and your Honour. I have honourably finish’d the first Part of this Example. Now, if you think your self wrong’d by your Son, he is in your Power, and I have no Right to deliver him up to you, as I do this false Body. It lies upon you to finish this Work upon the Offender, for I have perform’d all that was my Duty in giving you this Information, and depriving my self of the Daughter I lov’d best.

The King was astonish’d, without knowing how to return Thanks, or perform any other Act becoming a King; and having lamented the Misfortune for some time, order’d Prince Gariolano to be secur’d; but he, who was no less belov’d by the Guards than his Father, Guessing at the Consequences, The Prince Flies. which might certainly be deduc’d from the Queens violent Death, sparing no Horse-flesh, made to the Sea-Port, where he withdrew, with some of his Relations, from his Fathers Presence and Anger, till it naturally cool’d. It happen’d as he expected, for he was appeased before a Year expir’d, and the Is Restor’d to Favour. Prince was restor’d to his Favour; the King then making a Jest of the Stains of his Honour, and saying, He well knew his ill Luck in Wives and Concubines. But what Laws does he observe, who is guided by his Appetite? And how can he weigh the Duties of Honour, who Thinks that only the common Actions of the Sense have any solid being?

The End of the Sixth Book.