


Chiquiro, a Japonese Embassador, was newly arriv’d at Manila, with a Present of the Product and Manufactures of that Island, and orders to treat with the Governour, and settle Amity and Commerce, between the Subjects of the Emperor of Japan, whose Name was Dayfusama, and the Philippines and New-Spain. 

The Neighbourhood of those Provinces, the Power of the Japonese Kings, their natural Disposition, and other Considerations, which Experience had shown to be of great Moment, made against refusing of that Commerce; 

Yet there were Opinions to the contrary, for those very Reasons. However that barbarous Prince having once espous’d that Affair, it was not easy to find out an Expedient to settle it, without any Jealousy or Disgust. 

Dayfusama demanded, that the Spaniards should trade to Quanto, a Port in one of his Provinces, and that such Friendship might be establish’d, that the Japoneses might go over to New-Spain.

That the Governour should send him Ship-wrights, and Workmen to build Ships in Japan, for performing of that His Proposals. Voyage, upon which Dayfusama was very intent, being perswaded to it by a Religious Man of ours, of the Order of St. Francis, whose Name was F. Jerome of JESUS, and for whom that Monarch had a great Esteem.

Objections to them. This was a Matter of great Weight, and on several Accounts most prejudicial to the Philippine Islands, whose greatest Security for so many Years, has consisted in the Japonese’s wanting of Ships and Pilots, and being ignorant in the Art of Navigation. 

Men of Experience observ’d, that [182]whensoever the said haughty barbarous Prince has attempted to arm against Manila, he has still been obstructed by this Want. 

They said, that to send him Ship-Wrights, and Men to build him Ships after the Spanish Manner, would be no other than arming him against the Spaniards themselves; and that their Voyages would be destructive to the Philippines and New-Spain; for that the making the Japoneses capable of Trading far off, was not only inconvenient, but unsafe. 

The Governour Don Pedro de Acunna seriously weighing all these Reasons, order’d the Embassador Chiquiro to be magnificently entertain’d, made him some Presents for his King and for himself, and sent a Ship with another moderate Present, lest it should be interpreted to proceed from Fear, if it had been too considerable. 

This Ship sail’d with Dayfusama and his Embassador, both of them loaded with Commodities to barter. Don Pedro’s Letters contain’d many Compliments, and Thanks for the good Will he show’d towards establishing more solid Friendship. 

But that, tho’ he had ample Commission for all Things relating to the Government of the Philippine Islands, yet he could not satisfy that Part of his Embassy, which concern’d the furnishing of him with Sailors and Workmen to build Spanish Ships, without acquainting the Viceroy of New-Spain, nor could the Viceroy do it, without special Orders from the King of Spain. 

That he promis’d to write to them about it, for promoting the Accomplishment of his reasonable Demands; but that he must consider, it would be above three Years before they had an Answer, because of the great Length, and many Accidents of such Voyages. It was order’d that the aforesaid F. Jerome should himself deliver these Letters, to Dayfusama. 

The Fryar himself had a private Letter sent him with a Reproof for what he had done, and Instructions how to mend it; and that he should signify to the Japonese Monarch, how highly Instructions to F. Jerome. the Governour valu’d the Inclination he show’d to settle Peace and Commerce with the Spaniards, and his Kindness to them; and at the same Time perswade him to continue that good Correspondence, which the Governour would inviolably observe; but that he should endeavour to divert the King’s Thoughts from such Designs, and never go about to facilitate the Execution of them; because, tho’ perhaps the Emperor then reigning entertain’d no sinister Meaning, nor had any farther Thought than promoting a sincere Friendship, yet that might be very prejudicial in the Days of a more mischievous Successor; who might make an ill Use of his Skill in Navigation, and improve it against the Persons that taught it him. 

The Governour promis’d he would soon send another Ship with Commodities to barter; and he might put the King in Hopes it would carry over some Spanish Ship-Carpenters to build Ships after their Manner. That he should desire Dayfusama to wait with Patience, and consider how heinously he would be offended himself, if any of his Governours should presume to make any new Settlements in Trade without his Privity or Order.

Japonese Embassador cast away

Chiquiro left for Japan from Manila but was swallowed by a storm. 

<!-- with this Answer; but when he was off the Head of the Island Formosa, such a dreadful Storm overtook him, that he was swallow’d up, and neither Men, Goods, nor Arms sav’d; and this happen’d in so remote a Place, that it was not known till many Days after.  -->

Dayfusama, at the Request of F. Jerome, had granted Leave for Preaching of the Gospel, throughout his Dominions, building of Churches, and such as [183]would professing Christianity by publick Authority.

Don Pedro the Governour Religious allow’d to Preach in Japan. took the necessary Measures, that so favourable an Indulgence might not be lost, and that not only barefoot Franciscans, but also Religious Men of other Orders should go over thither. 

They made use of the Japonese Captains and Ships, newly come to Manila with Meal. The Dominicans sent over to the Kingdom of Zazuma four Fryars, and F. Francis de Morales, Prior of Manila for their Superior, saying the King of that Province sent for them, being the only one, who had not yet submitted to Dayfusama. 

The Order of S. Augustin sent two Religious Men, and F. James de Guevara, Prior also of Manila for their Superior, and these went to the Kingdom of Firando. Those of the Order of S. Francis, sent F. Augustin Rodriguez, who had been Witness to the Martyrdom of his Companions in Japan, to Nangasaqui, for him to go thence with a Lay-Brother to Miaco, and bear F. Jerome of Jesus Company. 

Many perswaded Don Pedro, not to send away these Religious Men; but tho’ those Perswasions were well grounded, and some Difficulties occur’d against their Departure, he resolv’d to dismiss them. The Zeal of true Glory overcomes all Opposition. These Religious Men found no Signs of those Desires that had been signify’d to them in the Provinces they went to. Very few Japoneses were converted, and there was less Disposition to advance, because the Kings, and Tonos, which are Princes had no Affection for our Religion, nor were any Way disgusted with their Idols. They only aspir’d to settle Commerce, and to trade with the Spaniards, for their private Interest.

Another Ship to Japan

Don Pedro sent the Ship he had promis’d to Japan, well stor’d with Cannon, and call’d it S. James the Less. The Captain, Officers, and Sailors were all Men of Experience; and she was laden with Commodities to barter, Red-Wood, Deer’s-Skins, raw Silk, and several other Sorts.

The Govenour order’d them to dispose of what they carry’d at the Port of Quanto, and to furnish the Religious Men they found there, and then return with the Produce and Dayfusama’s Leave. Thus Provision was made for all the Affairs of Japan, according to the present Exigences.

The Ship-Wrack of Chiquiro was known, and by the good Management of F. Jerome, Dayfusama was acquainted with the Answer he carry’d, and rested satisfy’d; so that the preaching of the Gospel went on in his Dominions.

Furtado’s Letter to Don Pedro concerning the Expedition. Don Pedro’s Thoughts were all bent upon Recovering of the Molucco Islands, and his other Business did not make him neglect that Enterprize.

Andrew Furtado de Mendoza, Admiral of those Seas for the Crown of Portugal had writ him Word, that he had Orders from his Majesty to repair to Ternate; but that he did not expect the Viceroy would set him out, as was requisite for that Expedition. Don Pedro answer’d him, to his Content, with Assurance, that he should be supported.

These Letters came to the Hands of the Portuguese Admiral at Malaca, when he was ready to set out. He presently answer’d both those of the 22d of September, and the 22d of December, signifying how acceptable they were to him. 

Because, says he, I love your Lordship entirely, tho’ I have never seen you, on Account of your being a brave Commander, and so zealous for his Majesty’s Service; not to mention other Reasons for which I am yours. I was much troubled for the Loss of the Ship, and the ill Fortune of the other, for [184]the want you will find of the Return you expected by them: 

But it is to be suppos’d, that the Viceroy of New-Spain, seeing how long those Ships were missing, would impute it to some very considerable Causes, and therefore will Assist you Powerfully, for nothing less can be expected from such a Viceroy who, I am told, is a very worthy Gentleman. I am experimentally sensible of what your Lordship writes to me; for after being in those Parts five Years, without receiving any Succours from India, when I expected these Disorders should end, and considerable Supplies would be sent me, the Viceroy furnish’d me so poorly, as will appear to your Lordship by the List of what he sends, and thence you may infer, how his Majesty is serv’d in those Parts, that your Lordship may acquaint him with it, and we may joyntly so order it, that all this may not be overthrown in one Hour.

Then he complains, That they have not sent him his Majesty’s Letter, More of the Letter. nor the Archbishop of Goa had not receiv’d his; and says, He had rather be at Plow in Old Castile, than a Witness to the ill Disposition of what is committed to his Charge: 

And proceeding, says thus, Your Lordship tells me, That as soon as I draw near the Moluccos, you will do me the favour to have in readiness for me 300 Soldiers, with Captain Gallinato, and another Captain, and two Galleys, four Brigantines, and all the Carcoas that shall be requisite. I know not what his Majesty appoints for me; but, for the Sins of these Dominions, Time has put Things into such a Posture, that I must be forc’d to repair to the Moluccos, as well to recover what is Lost, as to save what is Gain’d, which cannot be done, unless both Powers, from hence and thence, be United. Twelve Dutch Ships anchor’d this Year at the Bar of Goa: They took the Viceroy so unprovided, that they lay at Anchor a Month at the said Bar, without any Attempt made to remove them. They made great Havock amongst the Merchants Ships on the Coast of India, without any Opposition. They came from the other Sea, by the Back of Sumatra, to the Streight of Sunda. Seven of them arriv’d at Amboyna, the others being Baseness of a Portuguse Govenour. then parted from them. When they enter’d over the Bar, the Governour sent two Men, to ask, whether Don Emanuel was aboard.

The Ships hearing of it, went and Anchor’d under the Fort. Then the Governor sent three or four other Men, who made the Agreement for the surrendering of the Fort. When it was sign’d the Dutch drew near: the Gates were open’d to them, and they admitted without standing one Musket Shot, or firing a Cannon. They took an Oath of Fidelity to Prince Maurice, and the Governor after committing the Treason, commanded a Black of his own to put him into Irons, saying, The People of the Town had done it. Since that he came hither, and skulks about the Mountains, and I am very earnest to take him, that I may make an Example of him.

I have already secur’d some of the Marry’d Men that came hither, being fully convinc’d that the Governor and they are Enemies and Traytors. When the Dutch were possess’d of the Fort, they put more Cannon into it, with a Garrison of 140 Men, and Provisions for two Years. I have also received Intelligence, That they sent five Ships against Tydore, and I am very jealous of that Place, because of the Divisions there; wherefore I immediately sent away two Galiots, well Man’d, Arm’d, and Provided. 

God grant they find that Fort in the King’s Possession. Thus, if his Majesty well send hither the Galeons he writes of, and commands me to serve him in these Southern Parts, I must of necessity go over that way; for since [185]Amboyna is in the Possession of the Dutch, we may conclude Tydore will soon follow. If they extend their Dominion, from that Port, which God avert, they will thence put an End to the Affairs of the Moluccos, and of China, and with the Assistance of the Ternates must of necessity Infest those Parts about Manila; and therefore we are all oblig’d, as Christians, and his Majesty’s Subjects, to Oppose such a mighty Misfortune. And since the Lot has fallen between your Lordship, and this Soldier of yours, we seem to be in some measure both of us under an Obligation to spare no Pains for the Recovering of those Parts of the Molucco Islands. For my part I will labour for the Success, tho’ I were to lose ten Lives, if I had so many. But because I shall not have an Opportunity to send your Lordship Intelligence, till a Year hence, I now intreat you to have what Soldiers you can in Readiness, and the greatest Number of Natives, that we may not fall short when the work is half done, and be forced, for want of them, to put our selves into the Hands, and expect the Assistance of Traytors. 

The same I beg, as to Provisions; for there are none where I am at present. But since Captain Gallinato has seen all, and knows what is Necessary in those Parts, whereof he has before now given your Lordship ample Information, it will be needless to repeat it in this, being your Lordship tells me in yours, you do me the Favour to appoint him for my Companion; and he is so able a Commander, that when your Lordship orders him to prepare for this Expedition, he will take with him all he thinks proper for it. Tho’ his Majesty should send several Galeons, and many Men, I shall not be able to do any thing with them in those Parts, because the main Thing there, is to have Vessels that Row, and Men that have Serv’d, whereof I am very destitute. From India none can come, tho’ the Viceroy were never so willing to furnish me.

However, confiding in your Lordship’s Worth, and in what you have signify’d to me by Letter, I will undertake this Expedition, believing I shall find all Things in such Readiness, that they will set out from thence the Moment your Lordship receives Advice from me. I am told your Lordship expects a Gentleman in those Parts, who comes to Conquer Camboxa. If he happens to come, I must put your Lordship in Mind, that the best Conquest is that of the Moluccos, where his Majesty’s Forts will be restor’d, and there the said Gentleman may shew his Valour, and merit a considerable Reward from the King. 

Before the Dutch came to Amboyna, two English Ships passed by that Island, which sent a Letter to the Governor of the Fort, to acquaint him, that the Dutch were coming after them, with a Design to possess themselves of the said Fort, and therefore they advised him to behave himself well, because the Dutch they spoke of, were a poor faint-hearted People. That, if they had Occasion for Powder, Ball, and all other Necessaries, they were ready to supply him, because they were then at Peace with Spain, and the Constable of Castile was already sent into England, by his Majesty, to Ratify it: And the Post-Master-General was Embassador in Ordinary. This Intelligence leaves the Rebels no pretence to any Excuse. Furtado’s Letter goes on, to other Particulars, recommending Religious Men, and Commanders and he concludes with Abundance of Compliments, and Courteous Expressions.

Don Pedro having receiv’d these Letters, order’d and hasten’d all necessary Preparations, with the utmost Diligence, pressing the Business in Spain, and with the Viceroy at Mexico, and thought all Delays tedious; but the [186]Approbation of his Advice, and the Supplies to put it in Execution, being to come from a Center so remote, and where there lay an Obligation of being no less attentive to all Parts of the Circumference, the Expedition could Brother Gaspar Gomez forwards the Expedition. not possibly be brought about sooner. Brother Gaspar Gomez, whose Intelligence in this Affair, was always very material, had presently Intimation of what had been resolv’d on, by Letters from Don Pedro; and he was so diligent in promoting it, that to advance this Cause, he cross’d the greatest Oceans as readily, as if they had been the Narrow-Seas, which part those Islands; having solicited the Viceroy at Mexico, and then the Counsellors, and Ministers of State in Spain. His Arguments and Motives were the same we have several Times mention’d in this Work.

Dividing the Wealth of the South into three fixt Kinds, precious Stones, and Pearls, Metals, and Spice, and Drugs; all which were distributed among Enemies, English and Dutch. That the King had no Spice left, but only that of Tydore, which must be lost, unless speedily and powerfully supported, and the same Forces would recover Ternate, Banda, Amboyna, and what had been held in Celebes, Batochina, and the Places wrested by the Tyrants of Sumatra. All this the Jesuit made out by Demonstration, for he grounded not the least Information upon any thing less than Experience.

Succeeds in his Negociation. He was heard in the Council of the Indies, and the Council of State for the Crown of Portugal, and dispatch’d for the Philippines, by the way of New-Spain. By the other Way, the King order’d, that the Captain General Furtado, taking with him the necessary Fleet from Goa, should sail for the Moluccos, by special Commission, by Virtue whereof he afterward sent to ask Assistance at the Philippine Islands, as we have seen, and such Supplies were to be furnish’d on both Sides, as being united, might secure the Conquest of the Moluccos.

However the Event must of Necessity be tedious, the Dutch being already possess’d of all the King’s Forts in the Archipelago; and their numerous Fleets of all the Ports, Fairs, and Trade, with Factories conveniently settled for their Intercourse between India and their own Country. We shall not enter upon the Account of those Affairs, because no more of them than have been already mention’d, as yet related to the Moluccos. Much Time, and many Precautions were requisite, for these two Commanders to joyn, amidst so many Obstacles: They sent frequent Advice backward and forward, and neither Part was idle in the mean while.

Furtado Sails from Goa. At length, notwithstanding all Difficulties, Furtado sail’d from Goa with six Galeons, eighteen Galiots, and one Galley, with the King’s Orders, and in his Name those of the Viceroy Arias de Saldania, to fight the Dutch, and any other Enemy, and to proceed to Sunda, to chastize that King, and the Rebels in Java. He was directed to place Garrisons there, and having Disabled by Storms. settled the Affairs of India, to proceed to the Moluccos. 

They went out with good Hearts to undertake that Work, but were hinder’d by Storms and Tempests. In the Gulph of Ceylon, he lost the Galley, and seventeen Galiots that were under the Conduct of Francis de Sousa, and Andrew Roiz, and in them the greatest Strength he had to compass his Designs. He was three whole Years without any Succours to proceed on his Enterprize. At Malaca he recruited the best he could; and in December, 1601, Steering his Course for Sunda, relying on the Succours he expected from the King of [187]Palimbam, in Java, suppos’d to be our Friend and Confederate; but he was deceived, for that Infidel was so far from espousing our Party, that he had taken up with the King of Sunda, whom he intended, and afterwards actually did succour with 30000 Men. This did not dismay Furtado, but he sail’d on towards Sunda, referring the Punishment of the King of Palimbam Sails for Sunda. to another Time: There, on the Bar, he discover’d seven Dutch Ships, which he pursu’d, tho’ to little purpose, they being excellent Sailers. However the Galeon Commanded by Thomas de Sousa Aronches, fought five of them, killing many Dutch, without losing one Man; but her Rigging was torn, and she could not board the Enemy, who fled, drawing our Ships after them in such a manner, that Furtado could not possibly recover the Bar, tho’ he anchor’d in a Road, from whence he might have return’d to the Port.

This was a special Providence, for the Enemy did not seem dispos’d to stand, and they had already been upon both Bars; and therefore reflecting Arrives at Amboyna. on the Tears, and Groans of the Commanders, and Christians at Amboyna, he directed his Course towards those Islands, where he arriv’d on the 10th of February without being detain’d by some Victories he gain’d in his Way. The Natives and those in the Fort were alarm’d, believing they had been Enemies, but the Admiral giving a Signal, they knew the Christian Fleet. The Joy spread abroad, and the Shore was cover’d with People expressing it. Furtado first apply’d himself to repair the Fort, and refit the Ships. He also built four Ships, two Galiots, and twelve Carcoas. Then he set out, without losing Time, to make War on the Itos, and other Towns Subdues the Itos. that had rebell’d against the Fort, sending Joseph Pinto, with 200 Portugueses by Land. The Fleet sail’d round the Island, and lay a Month in the Bay call’d Bacacio. Texeyra, Commander in Chief of the Fort, went before, with a good Number of Carcoas, to reduce some rebellious Towns, especially those which are on the Mountains call’d Gunos, where there are excellent sweet Waters, and large Woods of Orange Trees. These Towns acknowledge their Fault, and came to make their Submission. Seven or The Gunos submit. Eight of the principal Men came from each Town. Every Town brought a Flag, and three large valuable Basons of bright Metal, and in them a little Earth, with Branches of Clove-Trees in Blossom, in Token that they deliver’d up the Land, with the most precious of its Product. Some brought Goats, and Hens, and such Fruit as their Country afforded to denote the same.

Furtado knew there was a private Alliance between the Rebels of Amboyna and the Dutch, and that ten Ships were to come to take that Fort, Ten Dutch Ships at Amboyna. and the other we had left us at Amboyna. They were so deeply engag’d in this Contract, that those at Sunda, seeing Furtado set sail towards those Parts, they did the same, and on the 10th of March, the ten Ships appear’d in Sight of the Islands, three of them coming on and treating with the Natives; yet for fear of us, they stood off to the Island Burro, and the other seven to Banda, to sail over to the Moluccos.

All this was known to Furtado by good Intelligence, besides that he receiv’d from F. Lewis Fernandez, Rector of the Society of JESUS, who was newly come from Tydore, with Letters from that King, and the Christians residing there, bidding him welcome, and pressing that he would come to their Assistance; Three of them at Ternate. [188]because three of the seven Ships that escap’d from him at Sunda, were together at Ternate. He was also inform’d, that those Ships, had found out a Way to relieve those Forts, passing between Borneo and Macossar, A new Passage to the Molucco. which is a shorter Cut by a Year; and that they were fortifying Ternate where they would not suffer the Dutch to leave them, but oblig’d them to stay and ingage in the War they expected. Furtado follow’d that in Amboyna, daily reducing some Towns that had revolted.

The Inhabitants of Rosatelo, built on an Eminence, and well fortify’d discovering our Ships, People of Rosatelo burn their Town. and Carcoas, set fire to all their Goods, and then to their Houses, and fled to a high Mountain, where their Wives and Children were before. The Way up to it was by tying to the Trees certain Rotas, which are slender tough Canes, that may be knotted like Ropes, a slow and almost useless Hold, which render’d the Mountain never the less inaccessible. Yet our Men making their Way thro’ Clefts, attain’d the Top two days after. The Rebels perceiving they were lost, came to receive the Conquerors with Submit. white Flags, but the King, not daring to trust to that Security, fled to remoter Parts.

People of Ito fly to the mountain. The Infidels of Ito, puff’d up with the Dutch Supplies they expected, made no Doubt of routing the Christians, as soon as they landed; but perceiving they were disappointed of the Succour of the ten Ships, which sail’d by without staying, and that Rosatelo was reduc’d; yet they were not quite dejected, but committed their Safety to the Strength and Tops of the Mountains. They abandon’d their chief City, properly call’d Ito. and the Fort there erected by the Dutch, retiring with all their Families to the highest and most impregnable Part of the Country call’d Nao and Bemnao, being two Rocks, one above another, like the Round-Tops in a Ship one over the other; whence the Shore appears near at Hand tho’ Nao strong place, whither the Rebels fled. half a League distant, by Reason of the Windings of the Ways. 

Nao is all encompass’d with upright Rocks, with pleasant Planes below. There are three Ways to get up to it, but all of them so difficult, that the very Lizards can scarce climb it. On these three Passes they threw up double Trenches, with strong Ramparts, and a good Number of Brass Sakers, and Demy-Falconets to secure them. At each of them was a considerable Number of Men, with their Colours flying, and all Sorts of offensive and defensive Arms, wherewith the Dutch have furnish’d those Southern Seas. The greatest Danger threatned was from a great Number of mighty Stones, or Pieces of Rocks, which being roul’d down from such a Height can bear down and destroy an Army. All the Enemy’s Power was now reduc’d to this single Place, and the Town standing on the first of the Pleasant Country of Nao, and Bemnao. two Rocks, being built on a large round Spot it forms, like an European City with good large Houses, after their Manner. 

All the Country about beautify’d with Clove Trees, like our Olive Trees, but with greater Heads. Among which there ran up Branches of the Male and Female Trees, and underneath all Sorts of thorny Plants, Orange, Lemmon, Citron and Zamboa Trees, with six, or eight Springs, each of them gushing out curious Streams of Water. All the Mountain look’d like a delicious pleasure House and Garden. On the Top of it appear’d the Town of Bemnao, which signifyes, the Son of Nao, exceeding the other in Number of Houses, and Extent of Woods. [189]

The General came to this Place on Palm-Sunday, order’d a Trench to be Furtado encamps at Bemnao. cast up, and Tents to be pitch’d, for a Defence against the Sun, and the Rain, which sometimes falls unexpected. He commanded an Enemy Amboynese, that had fallen into his Hands, attended by some Christians, to go enquire into the Designs of the People of Ito, and to guide the Way. When they were come within hearing, and had deliver’d their Message, Haughty Answer of the Itos. the Infidels answer’d, That they were the King of Ternate’s Subjects, and own’d none but him. That they would trade with the Dutch, and all other Nations they thought fit. That they would also sell Clove to the Spaniards; but that the King of Spain had a very long Neck.

Having return’d this Answer, they began to fire the Cannon. Our Men were forc’d to put up the Affront, and pass by their Fury; but the General regarding neither, order’d a Captain, on Monday, to view the Situation of the Place; because his Soldiers had gone up disorderly to their Trenches, and been repuls’d with Shot, and throwing of Stones, which made them retire down the Mountain with many wounded. The next Night he sent 200 Men, to possess themselves of a Mount that overlook’d the Enemies Trenches. They did so, and as soon as the Day appear’d, our Musketiers pour’d in Portugueses gain Ground. their Volleys of Shot, firing at the same Time with two Drakes, they had carry’d up with a Design to cast up another Trench, and thus they put the Enemy to Rout. The Trench was thrown up, and the next Night they remov’d the Drakes to it, drawing nearer, to make the greater Slaughter. Gonzalo Vaz de Castello-Branco commanded at this Pass. The Men here that Night talk’d with the besieg’d, and assur’d them, they would take their Fort the next Night, as they actually did.

They attack the Enemies Fort. On Wednesday Morning the General order’d the Drums to beat to Arms, to go up himself to the Hill where his Men were, leaving Trajano Ruiz de Castello-Branco below, with 50 Men, to guard the Camp; but without any Design of attacking the Fort that Day; but only to order the Men, and assign them their Posts. Whilst he was concerting this Affair with his Officers, Gonzalo Vaz came to them with a dangerous Shot in one of the Calves of his Legs, and five other Wounds running Blood. The Soldiers were incens’d, at the Sight of him, and signify’d they would fall on. It was given out, where the General was, that the Victorious Enemy was falling upon our Drakes, and Posts; and he improving Necessity cry’d out, with a loud Voice, Santiago, that is, S. James, the Cry given by the Spaniards when they fall on.

The Soldiers were so encourag’d by this Cry, that they immediately gave the Assault, with much Fury and Alacrity, climbing those smooth Rocks, upon their Hands and Feet: The Barbarians Drums and Bag-Pipes rattled in their Ears, and the Noise of their Cannon and small Shot eccho’d among all the Rocks. The Enemy threw Stones, which wounded, and knock’d down our Men, and many tumbled, without being able to help themselves: Some single Stones carry’d two or three Men down the Side of a Hill, till they stopp’d at some Tree. A Captain was stunn’d with a Pebble, tho’ he receiv’d it on a Steel Buckler; but he soon recover’d, and was seen upon the Enemies Works. The Cries and Shouts rent the Air. Many tumbling down forc’d out the sharp Pointed Stakes that were drove into the Ground; and presently after, as if they had flown, were seen Fighting above. Those who were left to guard [190]the Camp, look’d on with Emulation. Among them a Religious Man of The Fort taken. the Order of S. Dominick, fell on his Knees to say the Litany, all the Men answering, and God heard him, for before it was ended, they saw our Colours display’d above, and the Enemies cast down, the Fort and Works being Demolish’d.

A brave Christian, who carry’d the foremost of our Colours, was laid hold of by an Amboynese, yet he, tho’ shot thro’ the Body with a Musket-Ball, whereof he soon after Dy’d, defended them bravely. However, notwithstanding his Resistance, and that his Captain came to his Succour, the Infidel carry’d off a Part of the Staff, which was recover’d when the Victory was Amboyneses abandon their highest Fort. gain’d. The Amboyneses, seeing their Works taken, and their Colours dragg’d about, withdrew to the upper-Part, leaving only three Men behind them, who dy’d Fighting, with honourable Obstinacy. They did not fortifie themselves in that Place, but abandoning their Town and Goods, and slipping down Precipices, and upright Heights with Ropes, made their Escapes; and though they burnt some of their Goods, yet many of value remain’d. The General gave Order for curing of the wounded Men, which were above 200, besides those run through by the sharp Stakes pitch’d all about the Field.

The Towns submit. The gaining of this Victory did so discourage all the Islanders, that they refus’d to take up Arms, or hazard an Engagement. Nine Towns submitted at once, the next day, and the Territory about did the same. The General came down Victorious, and erected Arbours in those Delightful Woods, with an Altar, on which Mass was sung on Easter-Day, and all the Office of the Church, with much Solemnity, in Thanksgiving, assigning the Sovereignty to that Lord, who grants, or takes away Victory, according Dutch Fort raz’d. to his secret Judgements. The Dutch Fort was raz’d, where, in several Places, were to be seen Escutcheons, with the Arms of Count Maurice. The King of Ito came and submitted himself; his Name, whilst an Idolater, was Talere, afterwards Don Melchior, for he was a Renegado Christian, and fled at the taking of Rosatelo. He deliver’d himself up, as also a famous Caziz he brought with him, who was a Man of much Reputation among them.

To this Victory Furtado resolv’d to add those he expected at Veranula, Veranula City describ’d. a large City, and Neighbouring Island. He sail’d from Amboyna with all the Fleet, and arriv’d at Veranula, and the City of the same Name, which is populous, and its Territory the most fruitful in Clove of any in those Parts. It is built along the shore on a high and upright Rock, which look’d like a Wall, with Towers, and Stories. The Houses are high Roof’d, with Galleries.

There is a Mosque that has three Isles, with a stately Room to read the Alcoran in. Within the City was the Dutch Fort, conveniently seated, built of Stone, round, and cover’d. Beyond that was also another Stone Fort, with several salliant Angles, Ravelins, and Guerites. This belong’d to the King of Ternate, who was Tyrant of that Part of Veranula. As soon as our Fleet anchor’d before the City, the Prime Men of it came to acquaint the General, That they were willing to submit, but knew not how to do it, for Fear of the Ternates; and therefore desir’d he would let them assemble their Council, and they would return the next Day with their Answer. 

Furtado granted their Request, sending two Amboyneses [191]of Note along with them. They return’d no Answer, but fled, People of Veranula fly. not daring to stand the Fury of those who came Victorious. They fir’d a Gun for a Signal of what they were doing, and the General being assur’d of their Flight, order’d the Men to land and plunder the City. The Inhabitants had before secur’d the best of their Effects, and yet in some Houses they found above the value of 30000 Crowns, and in others less, besides many Goods of value; abundance of Brass Drakes and Muskets; China Ware, and Silks; Dutch Glasses, and great Store of Royal-Cloves. Veranula plunder’d and burnt. After plundering the City, they set fire to it, and it burnt for some Days. The Dutch and Ternatese Forts were raz’d. The General was inform’d by some Prisoners, that the People of Veranula, had expected mighty Succours against him from the Dutch Ships that were seen; and that there were aboard 100 Men to Garrison Viranula, and 100 more for the Fort he had demolish’d at Ito. Some of our Men pursu’d the Ternates as far as Lacidecavello, a Town where they imbark’d on many Vessels, for their own Island.

Mamala City submits with others. After this, the City Mamala sent to make its Submission, and many others follow’d its Example. Furtado having concluded this Affair, resolv’d to return to Amboyna, and being upon his Departure, Francis de Sousa Teve came to him, with ten Portugueses, who had been, not long before, taken by the Dutch Ships. He had met at Banda the five Ships Furtado found at Sunda, and here gave him some important Intelligence, showing how much he would find the Seas, in his Way to the Moluccos, infested by those Northern Sailers. The Commander in Chief of the Dutch made very much of Francis de Sousa, dismissing him with Arms and Provisions for his Voyage, but at the Price of 500 Crowns, paid for him and his Companions, by some Heathen Towns in the Island; to whom Furtado, without any Delay, made good the whole Sum. The Dutch General writ very civilly to Furtado, desiring he would use his Men well, as he would do by the Spaniards he met with. Furtado return’d an Answer, no less Courteous, and sent him a Dutch Youth, who had been Prisoner at Ternate.

The conquer’d submit, and give Hostages. Having reduc’d these Islands, Furtado appointed a Day for the Governors of them to come and swear Fealty to our King, that he might save Time, and follow the Course of his Victories. They came with much State, and Submission; and to secure their future Behaviour, and their new promis’d Fidelity, deliver’d to the General a considerable Number of Youths, being the Sons of the Prime Men, as Hostages. Peace, and the general Pardon, were celebrated with Rejoycings. The Preaching of the Gospel was again exercis’d with entire Liberty, and many Idolaters, and Mahometans were converted. Other Provinces came to acknowledge the Conqueror; without expecting the Chance of War. Furtado at Amboyna prepar’d for the Expedition against the Moluccos.

King of Ternate’s Preparations. Those who fled to Ternate, gave an Account of the Loss of the Towns and Forts that King had been possess’d of at Amboyna; and that the General Furtado openly declar’d he was making Preparations against those Islands, and grew stronger upon his Success. The King slighted not this Intelligence, but immediately strengthened his Fleet, and his Forts, and call’d in the Javaneses and Mindanaos, to be in [192]readiness upon any Attack. Amidst the Noise of War, and his Treaties with the Dutch for maintaining of it, he found Leasure to seek his Satisfaction; concluding a Match with his Queen Celicaya, who follow’d him in all his Troubles, even when he last fled from his Kingdom. She was very Young, and so Beautiful, that all the Indian Kings courted her for their Wife, and sent to demand her of the Sangiack of Motiel, her Father; who gave her to him of Ternate, as the greatest, most potent, and respected. His Marriage. The Time for the Nuptials being come, when the Bride was brought to Ternate, attended by her Father, Kindred, Brothers-in-law, and many Troops of arm’d Men, she was receiv’d with the Noise of Cannon, Musick, and other Instruments us’d in their Festivals and Solemnities. These Queen Celicaya’s great Beauty. lasted many Days, with Profusion; but the most pleasing Object, was the Presence of Celicaya, her extraordinary Grace, which drew the Eyes, and Affections of all Men, temper’d with a Sort of Affability, which encourag’d all that convers’d with her. This Quality very often gave Occasion to suspect her Husband’s Reputation, and were not this History confined to such Things as really relate to the Conquest, it might afford us a large Field to treat of the Gentleness of her Disposition, her Love Intrigues, and uncontroulable Power over the Affections, even of those who were most wrong’d; which are spoken of at large in several Discourses and Relations.

Furtado sends for Succours to the Philippine Islands. 

The Exigencies of the Time, and necessity oblig’d the General Furtado to press for the Succours, which were providing for him in the Philippine Islands. Amboyna is 200 Leagues from the nearest of them, and that 200 more from Manila, he sent thither F. Andrew Pereyra, a Jesuit, and Captain Antony Brito Fogaza, in May 1602. They arriv’d at Cebu on the 25th of July, sail’d thence for Manila on the 6th of August, and came to that City on the 5th of September. 

Don Pedro de Acunna was well pleas’d to see them, asking particularly concerning all the Proceedings of the General Furtado, wherein he was very curious, or rather generously emulous, and he having in his Letters referr’d himself to their Relation, they gave it him at large, and perform’d the Duty of their Embassy, each according to his Profession. Don Pedro did not delay their Business; but call’d a Council of War, wherein it was resolv’d, that the Succours he desir’d should be sent Furtado, tho’ they were forc’d to comply with the Difficulties the Country then labour’d under. Upon this Determination he sent away to Succours sent from the Philippines to Furtado. the Provinces of the Pintados, ordering Capt. John Xuarez Gallinato, who commanded there, to furnish all Things necessary for the Enterprize; and that he, with the best disciplin’d Infantry, should leave Cebu, and repair to the Town of Arevalo, the place appointed for the Fleet to rendezvouz. Gallinato did so, and sent a Ship to Oton, to take in as much as it could of the Succours. It arriv’d at Oton on the 28th of October; and that same Day Don Pedro set out from Manila for the Pintados, in Order to hasten the fitting out of the Fleet by his Presence, tho’ it was then almost ready at Oton, where he arriv’d on the 13th of November, and he was of such a mettled Temper, that never regarding the Expeditions of Xolo and Mindanao, or that the Natives of those Islands were spread about in Troops among those of the Pintados, robbing and murdering his Majesty’s Subjects, he gather’d the Supplies, and deliver’d them to John Xuarez [193]Gallinato, appointing him General, and Commander in Chief for this Expedition.

As soon as the General Furtado had sent away for Succours to Manila, after chastising and garrisoning of Veranula and Amboyna, he set sail for the Molucco Islands, with five Galeons, four Galliots, and 12 Carcoas, carrying his Victorious Men; but in those Seas Disasters are so frequent, that neither the Joy of their late Successes, nor the Refreshment receiv’d after their Victories, appear’d in their Countenances. He arriv’d at Ternate Furtado sails by Ternate to Tydore. with this Fleet, on the 10th of August; but he only look’d on that Island, and proceeded to Tydore: There he view’d the Fort, encourag’d the Soldiers in it, and made use of that King’s Person and Interest, as Prudence directed; for that Prince, tho’ he labours by Words to convince us of his Friendship and Fidelity, does not confirm it by his Actions; but rather leaves us dubious, when he most endeavours to perswade.

Furtado left the Galeons at Tydore, and with the other Vessels that row’d, went six Leagues thence, to the Island of Machian, then Subject to the Machian Island submits to Furtado. King of Ternate, but so weary of that Vassalage, that as soon as our Fleet appear’d, the Governours flock’d down to the Port, attended by the Natives, with their Wives and Children, and such Gifts as came next to Hand, as also some Colours, which they laid at Furtado’s Feet, submitting themselves, and delivering up their Country. The Men landed in peaceable Manner, amidst the usual Noise of Bagpipes and Basons; and the Portugueses having in vain sought after some Dutch Men, who chose rather to secure themselves by Flight, than to trust to the General’s good Nature, were inform’d that they were gone over to Ternate. A view having Dutch fly to Ternate. been taken of the Island, Furtado erected a Fort with all possible Expedition, in the most convenient Place. When finish’d according to the Rules of Fortification, he put into it a Captain with 50 Men, whom he left well arm’d and provided, and with them a light Vessel, call’d a Galizabra. Then he return’d himself, with the Rest of the fleet, to Tydore, where he joyn’d all his Ships, repair’d them, and set out for Ternate to the Port of Talangame, where he anchor’d, and lay from the End of October to the middle of February, when the Succours from Manila came.

Some accuse him of lying still very long without attempting any thing; Furtado accus’d. saying, he let slip the Opportunities, without cutting off the Enemies Provisions, or ravaging their Country, when he might have subdu’d them by that Means alone, without firing a Shot. However, when we have before us the Actions of such great Commanders, it is safer to judge they had some sufficient unknown Reason for what they did, than to attribute it to their Fault. Most certain it is, That being inform’d of a Fleet of the Enemies of 22 Carcoas, which was not far from the Island Machian, he lost no Time, but putting 172 Portugueses, of the chosen Men of his Fleet, into 18 Carcoas, under an able Commander, he sent them to find out the Infidels. But tho’ the Soldiers were so haughty, that every one undertook to fight six Carcoas, yet every Officer was for commanding all the Rest, and Portugueses baffled through their Pride. thus Want of Discipline snatch’d the Victory out of their Hands. The Enemy pass’d by, and they look’d on, without firing a Gun. The Barbarian Fleet, observing their Disorder, stood about nimbly, and pouring in a [194]Volley upon the Portugueses, took a Carcoa, with fourteen Men in it, whom they slew, in Sight of their Companions, and it was good Fortune that they did not follow their Stroke. This occasion’d the General’s erecting the Fort at Machian; whilst the King of Ternate strengthen’d his, with the Assistance of 20 Hollanders, making good Use of the Leisure of eight Months given him by Furtado. He then cast up Works, and provided Engines, as he did afterwards in the Sight of our Camp.

When the Fleet was all assembled at the Philippine Islands, the Ammunition and Provisions were deliver’d to Gallinato, by the Judges and King’s The Succours sent by Don Pedro de Acunna. Attorney of the Sovereign Court, being 1000 Bushels of clean Rice, 300 Bullocks for Flesh; 200 Jars of Wine; 80 Quintals, or hundred Weight of Nails, Hooks, Hinges, and other Iron Work; 40 of Powder; 300 Ilocos Blankets; 700 Yards of Spanish Woollen Cloth; 100 Needles for Sails; 30 Jars of Oil; and for the Complement of Men, 200 Soldiers, 165 of them heavy Harquebusiers, and the other, 35 light Musquetiers; 22 Seamen; some Pilots; one Master; three Gunners of S. Potenciana, and 20 Grummets. The whole Expence hereof amounting to 22260 Pieces of Eight a Month. The Governour and Sovereign Court having done thus much, they requir’d F. Andrew Pereyra, and Captain Brito, to go with that Supply, which was then in readiness, under Gallinato, with the Colours, and Captains Christopher Villagra, and John Fernandes de Torres. The Company belonging to Captain Don Thomas Bravo, the Governour’s Nephew, and Son to his Brother Don Garcia, staid behind, but the Captain went himself, and serv’d honourably in the Expedition. The Foot embark’d on the Ship S. Potenciana, and the Frigats S. Antony, S. Sebastian, S. Bonaventure, and S. Francis. They set sail from the Port of Yloilo, on the 20th of January, 1603, and arriv’d at that of Caldera, in Mindanao, on the 25th; where receiving some Intelligence of the Enemy, they continued till the 28th. Then they saild towards the Moluccos, and on the 7th of February descry’d the Island of Siao, and the next Morning, by Break of Day, that S. Antony Frigat cast away. of Toalan, four Leagues from it. There the Frigat S. Antony was cast away, on a Shoal of that Island, which discompos’d all the Squadron. Gallinato took Care to save the Men. He sent Captain Villagra, who brought them off, with the Arms and Guns; the rest was swallowed by the Sea.

They held on their Voyage, and on the 13th of February discover’d the Island of Ternate. On the 14th they arriv’d at Tydore, where they were inform’d of the coming of Andrew Furtado; and therefore stay’d but a Gallinato from Manila joyns Furtado. short Time to refresh themselves, being earnest to joyn him. Setting forward with a fair Wind, they came to Ternate, and enter’d the Port of Talangame, a League from the Fort, on the 16th of the aforesaid Month. The Fleets saluted one another in friendly Manner, and the Generals did the like, giving one another an Account of their Strength, Transactions, and all other Particulars till that Time. The Discourse falling out of one Thing into another, came to contesting; for Gallinato affirm’d, That the Enemies Provisions ought to have been cut off, by ordering our Carcoas to sail round the Island, which was in great Want of them, and could be reliev’d by the Opportunity he had given. Furtado alledg’d other Reasons to defend himself. It was thought convenient before they landed, to take [195]a View of the Enemies Fort, to which Purpose, the Captains, Christopher Villagra, and Gonzalo Sequeyra were appointed to make up to it in a Carcoa, with a white Flag, as it were to speak with the King, and propose Peace and Conditions.

Those two Officers drew near, the Enemy met them, and understanding what they came about, sent to acquaint the King. He answer’d he could not give them Audience that Day, but they might return the next. They returning accordingly, the Inhabitants of the City came out to meet them, Two Captains sent to the City of Ternate. and among them Cachil Sugui, Cachil Gogo, and Cachil Quipate, the King’s Uncles, who went back to tell him, that those Captains were come by his Highness’s Command. This Message was brought him at Nine a Clock in the Morning, and tho’ he was close by the City, the Answer came not till four in the Afternoon, and was, That unless Furtado, or Gallinato came, he would not speak with any other; but that the Captains that were come might treat with his Officers, and he would stand by, and ratify what they should conclude. The Spaniards having receiv’d this Answer, and their Design being to view the Fort, Captain Villagra Villagra views the Fort. set his Resolution, and pretending some Occasion, went into the Thicket, whence he observ’d all that could be seen on that Side, more nicely than could have been expected in so short a Time. They return’d to the Fleet, and gave the General an Account of all they knew.

In fine, they landed, and then again Gallinato intreated Furtado, to The Forces land. send out the light Vessels a cruising, to cut off the Enemies Supplies; and those which went out upon his Request, sped so well, that they met a plentiful and strong Reinforcement of Men and Provisions, in two Junks and a large Chiampan, which they took, killing and taking the Men, who were Numerous and well arm’d. They continu’d to round the Island, encourag’d by this first Success, and by that Means cut off all Succours. The Enemy began to want, sicken and dye. They fed on Herbs, and other slight Dyet; and many, but particularly Women, not being able to endure Hunger, Famine at Ternate. fled confidently, tho’ compell’d by Necessity, to our Camp; and the rest would have done the same if they could.

On the 27th of February, Furtado took a Review of his Men on the Christians review’d. Enemies Shore, where our Ships were at Anchor. Gallinato said, he was much troubled to see it, because in his Opinion, they were not fit even to make that Show, most of them being Boys, sick of the Distemper they call Berber, unskillful at their Fire-arms, and very few of them had Muskets, but only little Fowling-Pieces; so that all seem’d to forebode ill Success. The whole Number of them was 420 Soldiers, divided into four Companies. The next Day, the Spanish Infantry of the Philippine Islands pass’d Muster, in the same Place, before Furtado and his Officers. Don Thomas led them in Armour, and with a Pike in his Hand, with all the Musquetiers in the Van. After him the other Companies in Order, according to Seniority. They all form’d three Bodies, being Men of Experience, well equipp’d, orderly, and of such Valour as soon after appear’d.

A Council was held, about landing, on the first of March, where the Consuls about landing. General declar’d by Word of Mouth, saying he never did it in Writing, That he had lain so long, almost idle, wholly depending on the Succour that was come, and that since Don Pedro de Acunna had sent it so compleat, [196]it was not reasonable to lose Time. Gallinato answer’d, representing the Greatness of the Enterprize, and that they had provided no Necessaries to begin the Work, hinting at some Home Particulars, which were signify’d to him by the Portuguese Commanders. The Votes being taken, it was finally resolv’d to land, because all Things were in readiness; perhaps they conceited that the Enemies Power was imaginary, and that they would submit at the Sight of our Army. Gallinato was always of the Gallinato against it. contrary Opinion; because that Weakness he was an Eye-witness to, could not deceive him; and therefore that nothing might be wanting on his Part, tho’ he was under Command, but much respected, he writ a Role of the Things necessary for the Design in Hand, setting down in it even the Hand-Spikes for moving of the Artillery, which had not been provided in all that Time. By which may be seen, said Gallinato, how great a Defect there had been in the Rest. When the Council broke up, Furtado told Gallinato, he had order’d, that as soon as they landed, 200 Portugueses should mount the Guard, with one Company of Spaniards. Gallinato begg’d he would give him leave to lead the Van, saying, he would not go as Chief, but only as a Soldier, as being proud of serving under him. This he requested very earnestly; but Furtado, who knew how to value such Requests, answer’d, That if he went he must accept of his He begs to lead the Van and obtains it. Company. Gallinato reply’d, That he should take the Post due to his Person, since it was of such Consequence, and do him the Favour to grant him the Van. He would not grant it at that Time, but the next Day, he and his Admiral spoke to him, saying, He assign’d him the Van, by the Advice of his Admiral, and therefore desired he would be content it might consist of the Number of Men he had appointed. Gallinato accepted the Command, and valu’d it as was due. They landed on the 3d of March, and as they were drawing up, Furtado would needs place two of his Colours, and one of the Spanish in the Van, with 300 Men; the other three in the Rear; and the Royal Standard, and himself to be in the main Body; Gallinato was of Opinion, that all the Colours should march with the main Body, but the General follow’d his own Way.

They move towards the Enemy. In this Order they began to move towards the Enemy, Captain Don Thomas marching by Gallinato, who afterwards, in a Letter to Don Pedro, said, He this Day, and upon other Occasions, gave good Proof, that he was the Son of such a Father, and these grey Hairs of mine were sufficiently honour’d with the Assistance of such a Hand, and I was well defended and secure. The Enemy being above 700, kept in a strong and safe Post, the Shore on which our Men march’d, being little or nothing, by Reason it was High-Water, and that on the Land Side there was a very high Bank, and above it a rising and close Zacatal, which could not be broke through. Zacatal is a Field overgrown with such deep Grass or Weeds, that many Men, and much Cattle may be hid among them. These are much thicker Zacatal what it is. than the Fields of Sedge, or Sheer-Grass in Spain. They call it Zacatal, from the Word Zacate, signifying that Sort of Grass or Weed, which grows up almost as thick as a Reed. Along this narrow Slip of Shore, which was full of Rocks, and uneven, only three Men could march abreast, he that was next the Sea, being partly in the Water. The Enemy was possess’d of this close Pass, and a great Tree cut down for that Purpose, [197]and lying across the Place, serv’d them instead of a Trench. Behind Posture of the Ternates. it, and upon the Bank, between it, and the Zacatal, appear’d all their Men, with Muskets, Fire-Locks, Campilanes, or Cymiters, Bacacacs, or burnt Staves, Darts, Hand Granadoes, and Stones which did not do us the least Harm. They had also five Drakes in this Post, wherewith, upon some short Attacks, they kill’d five Spaniards; and afterwards, as the Action grew hotter, wounded ten Portugueses, in such Sort that they dy’d in a few Days. Gallinato owns he was this Day in Danger of losing his Honour; because the Colours, and all the Rest was in the utmost Peril.

Gallinato repulsed. The Enemy fought in Safety, and did our Men so much Harm, that the first Charge Gallinato gave, the Ternates fell on so furiously, as to drive us from the Ground we had gain’d. Gallinato look’d behind him to see the Colours he had brought with him in the Van, with the 300 Men, and found them at his Back very thinly Guarded. Thus the second Time the Shout was given to fall on, and he again oblig’d to retire, because he had fewer Men every time, and the last they were scarce twenty. At length shaming those that lagg’d, and as it were inspiring new Vigour into them, he Gains the Pass. fell on so fiercely, that he gain’d the Post, and the five Drakes. The Ternates lost all, or most of their best Men. Gallinato follow’d the Chace till he discover’d the Fort, then he halted, and order’d our Camp to be Intrenched. The work was begun, and the Enemy obstructed it twice, sending out Parties to prevent planting the Gabions, and divert the Workmen; but they retir’d both times with loss. When the Trench was finished, Gallinato Spaniards Intrench. sent to the General to come to it. He came and took up his Quarters, with all his Men, bringing the Royal Standard, and all the Colours.

The next Day he judg’d it convenient to carry the Lodgment forward. Trenches carry’d on nearer to the Fort. Gallinato undertook it, and with his Men finish’d the Trench, within 200 Paces of the Enemies Fort. There they continu’d some Days; and it being Gallinato’s Part only to obey, he sometimes gave his Opinion, and always did what he was commanded. He did so, when the General told them it would be convenient to carry on a Trench farther, to plant the Cannon. On the Ninth of the same Month, before the Fort had been well view’d, he went to open the Trench, with his own Men, and 100 Portugueses, a little above 100 Paces from the Walls, which being so near they all soon perceiv’d the danger of the Undertaking. It was the worse for the Confusion and Noise in filling the Gabions. The next Day the Cannon was brought thither, being four Guns, two thirteen, and two sixteen Pounders. These sixteen Pounders, which the Portuguese Soldiers call Camels, are short Pieces, unfit for Battery; besides that the Bullets Stone Bullets unfit for Battery. were made of Stone, and broke as soon as they touch’d the Wall; being only fit to fire at the Houses. Gallinato seeing this, told the General that since before they landed he said, he had Cannon, he should order it to be brought on, and planted in Battery, now he saw how ineffectual that they had prov’d. He answer’d, that there was all he had, having left the best in some Places he recover’d the foregoing Year; and could not bring any more such, by Reason of the stormy Weather.

The Enemies Strength. This being mounted, the Battery began; but being so improper for this Purpose, it was canonading the Air; for the Enemy overlook’d, and was strengthen’d by a Stone Cavalier, which is that of Our Lady, next the [198]Sea. Under it was a Ravelin, with seven heavy Pieces of Cannon which did, and threatned greater Harm to our Camp. The Cavalier was all Rampard, four Fathom high, and a Fathom and a half broad; all which had been perform’d, and rais’d with Espauls, by the Contrivance of the Dutch, who forwarded it, ever since they traded with that Tyrant. On the Land Side ran the Curtin of the Wall, as far as the Stone Bullwark, call’d Cachil Tulo, fortify’d outwards with Massy Timbers, on which there were three large Guns, and two on the Wall from this Bullwark to that of our Lady. All these Works look’d towards that Part, where our Men had taken up their Quarters. These Forts had also a great Number of Falconets, and Drakes; and the Cavalier that was batter’d being the strongest Part, where there was more Noise than Effect, the General order’d the Battery to cease.

They Sally. On Sunday the sixteenth, between four and five in the Evening, the Enemy sally’d out of their Fort, with most of their Men to attack, and gain the Trench, where our Cannon was planted. They assaulted it in three Places, dividing their Men, next the Mountain in Front, and towards the Shore. From the Mountainward came above 800 Ternates, with Campilanes, or Cymiters, in the Van of them almost as many Javaneses, with Pikes 25 Spans long, all in close Order. The Leader of them was a Amuxa, the King’s Nephew leads them. gallant Youth, call’d Cachil Amuxa, the King’s Cousin German, and Son to Cachil Tulo. Four hundred attack’d in Front, and many more next the Sea, each Body under its own Commander; who all fell on together with such Vigour, that had not they who defended it been in great Readiness, the Enemy could not miss of being Master of it. The Captains Pinto and Villagra commanded in it, who defended it bravely, but Emanuel Andres, Sergeant to Villagra, Alonso Roldan, a Corporal, and another Portuguese, who behav’d himself gallantly, dy’d fighting, being all run through with Pikes. The Advantage soon appear’d on the Spanish Side, He is Defeated. which the Enemy perceiving, they turn’d their Backs, leaving the Commanders their King had the greatest Value for, dead in the Field, and retired to the Fort. This Success gave Occasion to draw another Trench nearer the Fort, to batter the Ravelin, whence they did us Harm, with seven Pieces, notwithstanding our Work, which was carry’d on by the Captains Villagra and Sebastian Suarez. On Thursday the Trench was almost finish’d, and being near, made them so uneasy, that the Besieged began to batter it, with all their Cannon, but ineffectually, because the Gabions, and Rampart on the Inside, could bear much more. However, by this they perceiv’d the Power and Strength of the Enemy, and the Difficulty of the Undertaking.

On the twenty first of March the General came to the Trench, and Council of War held. calling together the Captains, Gallinato, Villagra, Antony Andrea, John Fernandez de Torres, Gonzalo de Sequeyra, Sebastian Suarez de Albergueria, Stephen Texeira, Gaspar Pacheco, the Admiral Thomas de Sousa Ronches, Lewis de Melo Sampayo, Jacome de Morales, Don Lope de Almeyda, Ruy Gonzalez, Trajan Rodriguez Castelbranco, Antony de Brito Fogaza, John Pinto de Moraes, and Don Thomas Bravo, and taking out a Missal, in the first Place desir’d them to take an Oath upon the holy Evangelists, that they would not speak of, nor any otherwise reveal, what he should [199]there propose to them, and what should be resolv’d upon it, till effected. They all swore, and then he propos’d the Matter thus.

Furtado’s Speech to the Council. I have call’d you together, Gentlemen, to acquaint you with the Condition I am in at Present, and this Siege has brought me to. It is two Years since I came from Goa, and during my Voyage, have spent a great Quantity of Ammunition, upon several Occasions; so that when we landed the other Day we had only ten Pipes of Powder, and 29 Barrels sent me from Manila. Since I landed, so much has been consum’d, as is visible, in Skirmishes, and Battery, that I have now much less than half that Quantity. The Dead, Wounded and Sick, of our Foot, now wanting in the Camp, are 130; and the rest, as daily Experience shows, fall Sick very fast of the Distemper call’d Berber. Our Provisions, tho’ we took the Rice the Frigates brought from Manila, are so short, that they can not last beyond the beginning of June. The Ships and other Vessels of the Fleet, in the Opinion of the Pilots, run a great Hazard, where they now lie at Anchor; because, when this Moon is out, there can be no Safety for it, by reason of the high Winds and Storms, unless they remove to another Place, and there is no other but Tydore. We see how resolute, and well fortify’d the Enemy is, since all our Battery has produc’d so little Effect, and if they receive any Damage, it is soon made up by the Multitude of People. The Friendship the King of Tydore promis’d for advancing of his Majesty’s Service, has prov’d so false, that he has perform’d nothing of what was concerted with him, tho’ so reasonable, and beneficial to himself; having only been free in Words, but his Actions have not yet been seen. I have had sufficient Tryal of him. He has no other Design, but to deceive, and amuse us, that our Men may be destroy’d by Degrees, and so Time may consume us if the Enemy cannot. When I press’d him to do something, to show at this Time that he was a Friend, and his Majesty’s Subject, he answer’d, he would; but that we must furnish Provisions for all his Men, because he had none. They demand Powder and Ball, for every trivial Undertaking, that so they may consume the little we have left; and when there is any Work to be done, there are no Men for it. Of the few Amboyneses I brought with me, for this Purpose, their Labour being great, some are return’d home, others gone to the Enemy. Those that remain are not sufficient, and most of what has been hitherto done is owing to the Infantry; which is so harrass’d, that it can do no Service. The Enemy expects Dutch Ships, and knows they are now at Banda. I have Intelligence that they have sent for them, and if they come they will be a great Obstacle to our Designs. Considering what I have discours’d of, I desire you, Gentlemen, and every one of you, still under the Obligation of the Oath, to give me your Opinions, that according to them I may resolve what to do, in pursuance of the great Duty incumbent on me.

Upon the Request of the Captains, the General Furtado gave in these Proposals in writing, tho’ he oppos’d it at first. In short they were written, as were the Opinions of the Councellors, among whom the greater Part, even of the Portugueses oppos’d the General; and tho’ I ought to give some Account of their Votes, because they had all different Views, yet, in Regard that most of them assented to Gallinato’s Opinion, it will suffice to set down his Answer.

John Xuarez Gallinato, Commander of the Provinces of the Pintados, and [200]Gallinato’s Answer to Furtado.

the Officers attending me, do answer to the Proposal made by your Lordship, as follows. That as to the want of Powder you represent, we look upon it as essential, since we can not fight without it, and if that fails, our Cannon and small Fire-Arms, are rather Encumbrances, than Weapons, and therefore it is requisite to resolve and agree, where and when to employ, and how much of what we have may be spent, so as our Enterprize may succeed, since we see how ineffectual that hitherto spent has been; considering, at the same Time, that a great Quantity is to be reserv’d, to fight five Dutch Galeons we expect; which, if they come, part of our Fleet must of necessity go out and ingage. For, if this be not done they will put Succours into the Place, which tho’ never so inconsiderable, as but of 100 Muskets, would be very prejudicial to us; besides that, it will be a great Disreputation, not to meet them out at Sea.

As to the Mens sickning, being kill’d and wounded, we say, those are Misfortunes always attending War; and that we are sensible how fast the Army grows weak, for which Reason, it will be necessary to be the more expeditious in the Work we have in Hand; yet so that neither too much Precipitation may expose it to Hazards, nor Delay give Time for all the Army to fall Sick. As for the Scarcity of Provisions, our Opinion is, that an Account be taken of what we have, how much is consum’d in a Month, and thus the necessary Distribution may be made in Time; for otherwise we shall fall short, when we least expect it; and Hunger will do us more Harm than the Enemy.

To the Danger of the Ships threatned by the Pilots, and their Advice to go over to Tydore, we answer. That if the Fleet quits the Station where it is, it will be a manifest Detriment to the Army, which is supply’d from it with all it Wants, and must want every Thing upon its Absence. Besides, that if the Enemy see it once gone, they will take fresh Courage; and if the Dutch come and find the Harbour empty, it is plain they will possess themselves of it. Again, if the Fleet makes off, must not a considerable Number of the Soldiers go for its Security? Now how can it be proper to divide our Forces; especially considering they are so small, and the Men so sickly? Besides that here is no Place to lay up the Provisions, for the Waters destroy them by Day and Night. Whilst aboard the Fleet, the Soldiers have it daily brought fresh and wholesome. Farther, the Pilots, and Natives of Tydore, say the Ships are safe in the Harbour till after the Middle of April.

We have had Tryal of the Enemies Power, and believe they have Men, Ammunition, and Cannon to spare, considering our Condition; and the Commanders, and Deserters from them confirm it. But neither can it be deny’d, that the very first Day we ingag’d as we have been told by Prisoners, and wounded Men, 1000 of the best Men they had in Ternate came out to stop our Passage with five Pieces of Cannon, and so posted, that only two of our Men could come up a Breast to charge them; and yet they with all these Odds, were beaten off with the Loss of many Men, as appear’d by the dead Bodies, scatter’d along the Shore, where they also lost their Artillery. The same Day we saw them sally upon the Fort of Santiago, where Captain Villagra commanded, and tho’ our Men were surpriz’d, yet they repuls’d them and slew the Flower of their Commanders; so that they were certainly [201]much weakned; and streightned by Hunger and Sickness. And tho’ with the Help of the Dutch, and their own Hardiness they repair the Breaches, and fortify themselves with Artillery, Means may be found to surmount these Difficulties, for if there were none, it would be no War we are ingag’d in.

We are sensible of the King of Tydore’s Want of Faith; but what discreet Commander has not made the best of such Accidents, and wink’d at disloyal, and unsteady Persons till a more favourable Opportunity; Besides, before we landed, Notice was taken of this Princes Indifferency, and that his Design is to protract the War, rather in Hatred to Ternate, than out of any Love to our Nation. We our selves will make amends for the Want of Labourers; we will be both Soldiers and Pioniers, as we have hitherto been; for the Sword and the Spade are equally honourable in so just a War; and we again offer our selves, and our Soldiers, to perform whatsoever shall be for the Service of God and the King.

It is therefore our Opinion, that the Galeons remove immediately; that two of them Anchor between our Ladies Cavalier, and S. Paul, and batter the inside of the Cavalier, and the other two, the House of S. Paul, the Fort, and the Town. Then of Necessity the Defendants within must fly, since the Defence of the Stone Parapet, is but a meer Show, except only where it looks upon the open Country. As soon as the Galeons begin to batter, we will also batter the Ravelin before the Cavalier, where the seven Pieces of Cannon are, which will certainly be ruin’d in two Hours, because our Fort of S. Christopher commands them, and the Thickness is not above a Fathom. To conclude, My Lord, the Want of Provisions, and of Health, the coming of the Dutch, the Resolution of the Besieged, of all other Difficulties will be surmounted by Celerity. We are ready to perform all Things on our Part; it belongs to your Lordship to make Tryal of our Promise. It will not be reasonable immediately to abandon the small Remains of Christianity in the Moluccos, and the Hopes of regaining what has been lost, in vain endeavour’d for so many Years, at the Expence of so many Millions of Money, so many Lives, and the Honour of European Nations, by turning our Backs upon so holy an Undertaking.

Furtado dissolves the Council, and acts counter to it. This Answer was sent in a Paper signed by the Captains, to satisfy all his Doubts, for they answer’d others by Word of Mouth, which were started by the Portuguese Commanders to perswade drawing off; but the General Thanking both Parties for their Zeal in Advising, broke up the Council; and on Saturday the 22d, came to a Resolution, which he left to be put in Execution the next Day. That Night he drew off the Cannon; and on Sunday Night, at the second Watch, the Forces began to March towards the Shore, where the Ships lay to take in the Men. The Admiral, Thomas de Sousa, led the Van; the General and his Officers, the Main Body; and John Xuarez Gallinato, with the Captains Don Thomas Bravo, John Fernandez de Torres, and Christopher Villagra, and the Musketiers, brought up the Rear. The Forces Shipp’d off. In this Order the Foot were Shipp’d off, and got all aboard by the Morning. At the same time two Dutch Men, of those that were in the Fort with the Enemy, fled from it, and came to the Ships. Among other Intelligence, they told the Spaniards how strong the Enemy were in Men and Cannon: That they had 36 heavy Pieces [202]mounted on the Ravelin near our Ladies; seven on Cachil Tulo’s Bastion; three between them; and two on the Cavalier; three at S. Paul’s; eight in the Main Fort; three at Limatao; three more on that Bastion, and four more near it.

This Day Furtado propos’d to sail away with the Fleet towards Amboyna, but wanting Water, put it off for four Days, and during that time Gallinato had leasure to Discourse him, since he was going away, about providing Furtado refuses to supply Tydore, and other Places. the Fort of Tydore, which could not be Maintain’d without Supplies. He Answer’d, He was very willing to do it, but could not; and therefore would send Succours from Amboyna. Application was made to him to provide for other Wants, which concern’d his Majesties Service, to which he return’d the same Answer. He press’d him to consider, in what Condition he left the Fort of Machian, whereto particular Regard ought to be had, because there were 50 Men and a Captain, with the small Vessel, call’d a Galizabra, and he must either Relieve, or Dismantle it. He said, He had already sent to Destroy it, and did believe it was then Raz’d. Machian Fort raz’d.

Having taken this Order, and Leave of the Commanders, he set sail on Thursday the 27th of March, sending a Letter to Don Pedro de Acunna, the Governour of the Philippine Islands, with an Account of the Particulars of this Enterprize: A small Part of it will suffice to express the Thoughts and Intention of so Discreet a Commander as he has been prov’d by his former and later Actions; for it is not to be believ’d that he would quit the Attempt upon Ternate, without substantial Reasons: The Succours your Lordship Part of Furtado’s Letter to the Governor of the Philippines. sent me, says he, by Gods Assistance, came in good Time; for it was Providence that furnished his Majesty with this Fleet, and sav’d the Lives of us, who still enjoy them. By what has happen’d in this Expedition, his Majesty will understand how much he is beholding to your Lordship, and how little to the Commander of Malaca; since it is his Fault, that his Majesty was not serv’d. When the Succours your Lordship sent me arriv’d, this Fleet had no Ammunition, as having been two Years out from Goa, and having spent it as Occasion offer’d. Wherefore, that it might not be thought I Obstructed his Majesties Service, I landed; and did it with the Loss of many of the Enemies. I carry’d up my last Trenches within 100 Paces of the Enemies Works, planted five heavy Battering-Pieces; and in ten Days Battery a great part of a Bastion, wherein the Enemies main Strength consisted, was ruin’d. During that Time all the Powder the Fleet had was spent, without leaving enough for one Charge of the Guns, and if it should happen, as I do not question it will, that I meet any Squadron of Dutch, I must of Necessity fight them, this being my principal Motive for raising of the Siege, when the Enemy was reduc’d to great Streights, both by Want, and for that many of their best Commanders had been kill’d during the Siege. By this your Lordship may guess at the Condition I am in. This Letter dilates upon the Complaints against the Governours of India. He promises Don Pedro, that if he meets with any Succours at Amboyna, and is not oblig’d to go relieve the southern Parts, he will return to the Moluccos, tho’ he be forc’d to go refit as far as Malaca. He praises and recommends the Captains Gallinato, Don Thomas, Villagra, and their fellow Soldiers, and so concludes the Letter.

Gallinato went to Tydore, where he was inform’d, that tho’ the Fort of [203]Machian was abandon’d, only one Bastian of it was dismantled; so that if the Enemy would possess themselves of it, they might do it with Ease, and were actually about it. Hereupon he spoke to the King of Tydore, Gallinato at Tydore takes Care of Machian. and the Portuguese Commander in Chief, recommending to them, that they would either take Care to maintain, or else quite raze that Fort. They commission’d a Captain to do the latter, who going to perform it, loaded the Vessel, call’d Galizabra with 200 Quintals, or a hundred Weight of Clove, and return’d to Tydore, to the great Satisfaction of the Portugueses of that Island. At this Time the King of Ternate was repairing the Breaches in his Fortifications, and rais’d new Defences, providing against Dangers he knew Nothing of yet. His Subjects are Warlike, Falshood of the King of Tydore. with whom, and the Assistance of the Dutch, he thought his Kingdome invincible. Great Matters might have been expected could any Confidence be repos’d in the King of Tydore; but our Commanders say his People, and those of Ternate understand one another.

On the 17th of April, the King of Tydore acquainted Gallinato, that with The King and Queen of Tydore at Variance. his Leave he design’d to make Peace with the King of Ternate. He answer’d, He would do well to consider what was expedient for his own Dominions, without Detriment to his Majesty’s Service. The same Day the Sangiack of Nua, in the Kingdom of Bachian, came to Tydore. He was a Christian, and laying hold of the Opportunity of serving his Majesty in the last Expedition, visited the Queen of Tydore, a beautiful young Lady, Daughter to the King of Bachian, who liv’d discontented, because the King her Husband was more fond of another ancient Woman, and not so well born. The Sangiack had Commission and Strength to steal her away, and conduct her to her Father, since neither Complaints, She is stolen away. Intreaties, nor any other Methods had been of Force to reclaim the King. On the 4th of May, came a Sister of the King’s, on the same Pretence of visiting her Niece, and reconciling her to the King. The Sangiack and she having concerted those Affairs, the young Queen going abroad with them to an Entertainment, and all Things being provided, they embark’d, and sail’d away towards Bachian. The King of Tydore was enrag’d, out of Patience, and apprehensive of a new War; tho’ afterwards this Difference was amicably adjusted, by the Interposition of Cachil Malua, a principal Person of Bachian.

On the 22d of May News was brought to Tydore, that the King of Ternate, had fitted out 50 Carcoas in his Harbour, and expected the Dutch Ships. He, at the same Time, made Rejoycings, in a triumphant Manner for the Departure of the Spaniards. It was requisite to leave some Men and Provisions in the Fort of Tydore, which being done, Gallinato, who Fort of Tydore supply’d. had before writ by an Advice-Boat, to the General and Governour of the Philippine Islands, left the Moluccos, and sail’d himself that Way. This was the Event of that so long intended and threatned Undertaking, which I have deliver’d impartially, having search’d after, and even guess’d at some Excuses to justify the Behaviour of so great a Commander as Andrew Furtado; enquiring of those very Officers who were present at the Attacks, and in the Councils. Neither by them, nor by the General’s own Memorials Impartiality of the Author. and Papers, can be found or made out any more than what appears by those which have been here inserted; but to judge of these Affairs is not the Part of an Historian. [204]

Earl of Lemos President of the Council of the Indies. This same Year, about the beginning of April, the Presidentship of the Council of the Indies was conferr’d on Don Pedro Fernandez de Castro, Earl of Lemos and Andrade, Marquess de Sarria, Chief of his Family, whose Royal Antiquity is well known, Nephew and Son-in-law to the Duke of Lerma. In his Youth he gave such Hopes, as were afterwards fulfill’d by his Actions. He was then Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber to our King. The World made the same Judgment of him, that the Senate of Rome had in his Time of Scipio, afterwards call’d Africanus, when it made a Scruple of entrusting him with Matters of great Difficulty, because he was so young. But Experience soon made appear in the Earl, as well as in Scipio, that Prudence, which regulates all other Virtues, often anticipates grey Hairs. It is no Merit of the Off-spring to be descended from Noble, or Plebeyan Families; but such was the Vivacity of this great Man’s Spirit, and Judgment, that had he been born Mean, he might by his own natural This was writ when he was living. Parts have made his Fortune. No Man can say he wanted publick or private Accomplishment. In him appears a settled Magnanimity; with a courteous Sincerity; yet temper’d with that Justice we extol in the severe Austereness of some of the Ancients. These Virtues are interwoven with Religion, a Zeal for its Propagation, and the universal Agreement, which is the Product of publick Tranquility. Thus he serv’d his King, with Care and Solicitude; without Intermission, or seeking himself and his Advantage. It will be requisite to be brief in this Particular, because his singular Modesty is not pleas’d with the Soothings of Commendation; but is as averse to Flattery, as remote from standing in need of it.

Member of the said Council, at that Time. The Earl found the Council fill’d with zealous and grave Men; the Lords Benedict Rodriguez Valtodano, Peter Bravo de Sotomayor, Alonso Molina de Medrano, Knight of the Order of Santiago, or S. James the Apostle, James de Armenteros, Gonzalo de Aponte, Don Thomas Ximenes Ortis, Don Francisco Arias Maldonado, Benavente de Benavides, John de Villagutierre, Lewis de Salcedo, and Ferdinand de Villagomez; all of them qualify’d by Extraction, noted for Learning, and having taken the highest Degrees in it. These were Counsellors, and the last of them Solicitor General of that Assembly. To which also belong’d John de Ybarra, Knight of the Order of Calatrava, and Commendary of Moratalaz, and Peter de Lodesma, the King’s Secretaries. In the Places of the Licenciates, Molina de Medrano, and Gonzalo de Aponte, whom his Majesty afterwards employ’d in his Royal Council of Castile, and in those of some who dy’d, his Majesty, at several Times put in the Licenciates, Lewis de Salcedo, Gudiel, and Don Francis de Texada y de Mendoza, Doctor Bernard de Olmedilla, and John de Ybarra, &c. All these amidst that Multitude of Business they dexterously dispatch’d, laid all their main Designs, for the restoring his Majesty’s Monarchy to its Fulness, in those utmost Limits of it; a Project suitable to the Genius of the new President. He enquiring into the general and particular Posture of all Things then depending, met with that of the Molucco Islands, and finding it of Consequence, and almost forgotten, inclin’d to give it a helping Hand.

Br. Gaspar Gomez informs the Council. Much about this Time, Brother Gaspar Gomez came into Spain, being sent by Don Pedro de Acunna, to solicite that Enterprize. The Brother at several tedious Audiences, gave the President full Information of all that [205]concern’d the Molucco Islands, their Wealth, the great Treasure Spain has expended in Attempts to recover them, to restore persecuted Christianity, where it had been so much receiv’d; and what Consequence it was, that this should be done by Way of the Philippine Islands. The Earl undertook that Cause, as such ought to be supported, and consulted about it with the Council, with the Duke of Lerma, and most particularly with the King’s Confessor. He never desisted, till it was brought to bear, and in such a Forwardness, that it might be effectually dispatch’d. The Members of the supream Council, with the same Zeal, and considering the repeated Disappointments of this Enterprize, forwarded the Expedition, and all of them agreed that Don Pedro de Acunna should undertake it in Person. This favourable Disposition of theirs, was fully confirm’d, by the News brought a Year after, of the ill Success of the united Forces of India under Furtado, and those of the Philippine Islands, under Gallinato. It was writ by Don Pedro de Acunna, describing it to the Life, with Duplicates for his Majesty, and the prime Ministers, and though he left much to Brother Gaspar Gomez, he was very particular himself.

He complain’d that they had let slip such an Opportunity of Recovering Ternate, and chastising the Dutch, who resort thither to the Trade of Don Pedro de Acunna’s letter concerning the Enterprize on Ternate. Clove, Mace, and other Spice, and Drugs. He represented the Danger the Philippine Islands were in, after that Neighbouring Tyrant’s Victory; and that having more particularly weigh’d the Circumstances of that Affair, besides the Necessity of regaining the Reputation lost there, he found that whatsoever has been yet said, was short. For not to mention the principal End, which was the Propagation of the Faith, but only with Regard to the King’s Revenue, he show’d, That Ternate being reduc’d it would be easie to subdue the Islands of Banda, which are above thirty, lying about a hundred Leagues from the Moluccos, full of valuable Mace, and possess’d by an unwar-like People, would add that Income to Spain, and take it from the Dutch, who carry all away, with little or no Opposition. He promis’d the same as to the Islands Papuas, which are many, not far distant from Ternate, some of them Subjects to that King, and yielding him a considerable Quantity of Gold, Amber, and other valuable Tribute. Then he extended to the Great Batochina, or Gilolo, describing its Fertility, and how that Tyrannical King oppress’d it. Those of Celebes 45 Leagues from Ternate, where he had strong Garrisons. The Greater and Lesser Javas, whose Kings would again submit to Spain, as soon as the Moluccos were brought under. He earnestly recommended Secresie and Expedition. To evince the Necessity of both, besides the usual Reasons, he urg’d that as soon as those Rebels and the Dutch hear of any War-like Preparations, they spare neither Cost, nor Labour, to make all necessary Provision; and that they never sail by the Coasts of India without ruining, and plundering them. He affirm’d, that the General Furtado was no way to blame for having abandon’d that Enterprize; for as it plainly appear’d, and Captain Gallinato declar’d he had always behav’d himself like a brave Gentleman, and discreet Commander; but that besides the Want of Provisions and Ammunition, he could not relie upon his own Men; and that if the Succours sent him from Manila had been more considerable, he would have hazarded all with only them. He said, the King of Tydore had sent him great [206]Complaints against the General Furtado, and that it was a common saying with him. That before he came to the Moluccos the King of Tydore Slept, and he of Ternate Watch’d; but now the Case was alter’d, and the contrary might be said. Yet he believ’d he was not heartily sorry for the Disappointment. The same he urg’d in Relation to the Kings of Bachian and Sian. He concluded, offering to undertake that Affair in Person, provided he might be furnish’d with what was necessary, that he might not be Distress’d as his Predecessors had been. Then he went on, by way of Answer to the Objections, or Accusations of the Spanish Commanders, who being us’d to the Wars in Europe, despis’d all other Enemies, who made War without all those Engines, and Fire-Arms us’d in Flanders, France, and England. He says, none of those Eastern Provinces wanted any of the Inventions we have in Europe; and that besides the great Numbers they have, and the Dexterity in using them of the Japoneses, Chineses, Mindanaos, and Moluccos, they are no less expert at their Bows, and Arrows; especially the Javaneses, who conquer when they fly, and that they are not destitute of such Strategems, that the Spaniards have need of all their Valour against them, and their numerous Armies. He owns the Molucco Islands can not stand in Competition, with the strong and populous Cities taken in our Parts, but that nevertheless, so many Christian Churches as have been polluted in them; the banishing of our Religion; the Persecution of its Ministers; the continual Tyrannical Practices; and Alliance of those People, with the Dutch, his Majesties last Rebels, ought not to be cast into Oblivion. And that, were there no other Motive but this, the King ought to retrieve his Honour, which is concern’d for the loss of so many of his Fleets, and Commanders. It is very remarkable, that tho’ in these Letters he gave an Account of the Posture of Affairs, either as to Peace, or War, of so many several Kings, among whose Territories the Spanish Arms appear, not without Glory; yet he insists not so much on any Point, as that of Ternate, which was grown Old by above thirty Years standing, to the Discredit of our Nation. From all this may be inferr’d, how necessary it is always, in Affairs of great Difficulty, to bend the entire Understanding to them, and to be in Love with the Design conceiv’d, that so the Event may answer the Expectation. He at the same Time sent long Reflections, and Projects of the Count de Monterey, then Viceroy of Peru, relating to the Execution of that Affair, wherein it plainly appear’d, by the Consonancy of the Reasons, And the Opinions of Men well acquainted with those Parts, that the Expedition was of greater Concern and Importance, than all the Arguments made use of upon the like Occasions do ever amount to.

Lewdness of the King of Ternate and Cachil Amuxa. Thus was Ternate bandy’d in the Councils of Spain, whilst at home it abounded in Trade, yet stood upon its Guard, and particularly the King, whose Prosperity gave him Occasion to indulge his Inclinations, of Cruelty towards the Christians, and private Satisfaction to himself. He gave himself up to the Love of Celicaya, yet being divided among so many Women, it had not the usual Power over him, but allow’d of other Diversions. Cachil Amuxa, the bravest of his Commanders, and his Cousin German, was newly Marry’d to a Daughter of the King of Mindanao, a singular Beauty, not of the Asiatick Sort, but of the Spanish or Italian. The King, who was us’d to observe no Rules, courted her as a Gallant, and as a King, persisting, and presenting her; and was soon admitted by the Indian [207]Lady. Her Husband, tho’ their Privacy for a while conceal’d his Wrong; at length, by the King’s contriving to keep him abroad, and the Interposition of Time, which reveals all Secrets, found out who it was defil’d his Bed. What could the unfortunate Man do? He durst not kill his Wife, for the Love he bore her, and for Fear of the King’s Displeasure. He resolv’d to be reveng’d, as if it had been in a Money Concern. In order to it, he dissembled the best he could, and whensoever he had an Opportunity to talk to Queen Celicaya, either feign’d, or profess’d Love, till he had inculcated it as he desir’d. He bore with the Disdain and Threats, which are the Weapons Nature bestow’d on that Sex; and Perseverance prevail’d, for Celicaya rewarded Cachil’s Love. This Intrigue continu’d Amuxa Cuckolds the King in Revenge. a considerable Time, till the King found it out, and both Rivals took Notice of it. Tho’ the King more deeply resented the Reprisal his Kinsman had made, to be reveng’d; yet they did not fall out on that Account, nor forbear conversing together. They preserv’d Peace and Friendship in their Houses; and the King stood so much in need of Cachil Amuxa, for his Wars, which in those Parts are no less frequent, than Peace, the special Blessing of Heaven, is among us, that he durst not declare against him, and what is more, not so much as displease Celicaya. She, as if the Abuse tolerated in Men had been allow’d to Women, justify’d herself by alledging the Wrong the King had done her in courting the other. However, The King’s Revenge. the King being once in the Field, under one of their Arbours, and Cachil Amuxa coming in, without his Campilan, or Cymiter, the Guards upon a Signal given them, handled their Arms, fell upon, and gave him many Wounds on his Head, Face, Arms and Body, none daring to defend him. He was sensible of the Occasion, and Revenge, and suddenly drawing a small Criz, or Dagger, he happen’d to have about him, did not only defend himself against many Cuts and Thrusts, but assaulted the Murderers, and with great Activity, wounded some, bore down others, and put the rest to Flight, killing four. Nor had his Fury stopp’d there, but that the King slipp’d away; tho’ now his Wounds had weaken’d Amuxa by Reason of the great Quantity of Blood that ran from them. He was left for dead; but an Uncle of his, hearing the Noise, came in to his Assistance, with his Followers; who all bound up his Wounds, and carry’d him to his House, where he was cur’d, by the King’s Permission. This was the Effect of his Fear, rather than good Nature, for all his Kindred took the Injury upon themselves, and began to meditate Revenge; which they would certainly have compass’d, and made fair Way for the Pretension of Spain, had not those who were apprehensive of another War soon reconcil’d those Animosities. The Cachil was cur’d, but with such Scars in his Face, and so many deep Gashes and Seams in his Head, that he was nothing like the Man he had been before. So say they who knew him, and have seen him in our Days at Manila and Ternate. He was restor’d to the King’s Favour, and both of them to that of their Wives, without Notice taken of the Accident, or as if it had been a Secret. So great is the Difference in the Humours of Nations.

The End of the Eighth Book.



