---
heading: Book 1b
linkTitle: Book 1b
title: "Portugueses Pretentions to the Moluccos"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---



By virtue of this practice, and by the Pope’s subsequent Authorizing of it, the Portugueses pretend that the Molucco Islands, and those of Banda, and Amboyna, are within their Bounds, as they were adjudg’d, and settled by experienc’d Sailers, calculating the Extent of that Meridian, and they even stretch it 15 Degrees further. Resende complains, That Magalhaens, whom the English call Magellan, magnify’d the Opinion conceiv’d of the Eastern Seas, when in the Year 1519 he went away Disgusted into Spain. Magellan grew up in the service of Queen Ellenor, then serv’d King Emanuel, and went over into India with that Alonso de Albuquerque, of whose Bravery, and Conduct, we have written Histories, besides what Fame, and Tradition have deliver’d. This Man, not satisfy’d with the first Conquests, sent Antony de Abreu, Francis Serrano, and Ferdinand de Magalhaens from Malaca, with three Ships, to Discover the Molucco Islands. All these three Commanders steer’d several Courses. We shall [5]soon speak of Magellan again. Antony de Abreu arriv’d at Banda, and returning towards Malaca, richly Laden with Spice of that Country, Serrano was parted from him in a Storm, and Shipwrack’d on the Islands of Lucopino, signifying Islands of Tortoises, so call’d from the Plenty and Bigness of those Creatures.

There the Tempest left the Portugueses, only their Lives and Arms sav’d, Serrano cast on the Islands of Lucopine. for their Junck, which is a sort of light Vessel, was Stav’d. The Lucopine Islands were Horrid, by reason of their want of Water, and being Desert; for their Rocks lying under Water, and the many Sea Robbers that frequent them, and always keep Sentinels posted to discover any Sailing by, that they may fall upon, and plunder them. Had not Hunger and Thirst threatned the Portuguses with speedy Death, they had reason to expect it at the Hands of those Pyrats; but that which had been the Destruction of others, at this time prov’d their Safety. Those Miscreants had observ’d the Shipwreck, and Rowing up in a Vessel call’d a Caracoa, as it were to a certain Booty, drew near to those who had so narrowly escap’d perishing in the Sea; but the Malaca Pilots, and Mariners were not ignorant of their design. They acquainted their Captain with the Danger, desiring him to take such Measures as might be for his own, and their Safety. Serrano, like a Man of Valour and Discretion, having view’d the Shore, conceal’d his Men in a hidden Place. 

The Pyrates landed to pursue them; but as soon as ever they were at some distance from the Shore, the Strangers rush’d out, and possess’d themselves of the Caracoa. The Barbarians thus surpris’d, reflecting on their Mismanagement, and perceiving they were lost Men, gave over the thoughts of Robbing, and had recourse to Intreaties, throwing down their Bows and Arrows, and begging they would not leave His Escape. them in that Island, but rather take pity, and pardon what they had done; and promising, if he would carry them off, to conduct him to another place, where Strangers were well receiv’d, and there was Trade. Serrano granted their Request, and admitted them, and having repair’d the shatter’d Junck, and Embarking together, they directed their Course to the Island of Amboyna, where they were well receiv’d by the People of Rucutelo, who were ancient Enemies to those of Veranula, a Neighboring City of Batochina, with whom those of Rucutelo coming to a Battle, they obtain’d Arrives at Amboyna. the Victory, through the Assistance of the New-comers. The Fame of this Success flew over to the Molucco Islands, at the Time when Boleyse Reign’d in Ternate, and Almanzor in Tydore, who were both not long before Idolaters, and then Mahometans.

These two were at Variance about the Limits of their Dominions, and understanding that the Portugueses were at Amboyna, each of them desiring to Strengthen himself against his Enemy, sent Embassadors, and Ships, to invite, and bring over to them those Forreign Soldiers; thinking it also convenient upon other accounts, to enter into Alliance with those People, whose great Actions were then so fresh in the Mouths of all Men. Boleyse was quicker than Almanzor, and sent ten Ships for Serrano, with a Thousand well Arm’d Soldiers for their Defence, the whole under the Command of his Kinsman Cachil Coliba. The Tydore Embassadors return’d from Rucutelo disappointed. It is but a short Cut between Amboyna, and Ternate, and therefore Boylese’s Ships soon return’d with the Portugueses. That King went out attended by his [6]Subjects, to receive the new Guests; all of them concluding, That they went to see the fulfilling of their so long expected Prophecy. Serrano Landed in bright white Armour, and his Companions in the same manner. Settles at Ternate. When the King saw them, he embrac’d every Man, with a Countenance full of Pleasure and Admiration, shedding Tears, and lifting up his Hands to Heaven, bless’d God, and gave hearty Thanks, for that he had granted him to see that which had been Predicted so many Years before. These, said he, my Friends, are the Warriers you have so long wish’d for, on account of my Prophecy. Honour them, and let us all vie in Entertaining them; since the Grandeur of our Country depends on their Arms. The Portugueses, well pleas’d to be thought worthy of a Prophecy, the Beleif whereof was a Politick Invention, conducing to their Reputation, made no less Courteous Returns, expressing their singular Affection. They settle Amity, and Trade in the Moluccos; whence they spread it to the adjacent, and remoter Islands, which it will be now requisite breifly to Describe, for the better Understanding of this History.

Archipelago describ’d. 

The Eastern Archipelago, not to speak of the Division of those Oriental Parts into Northern, and Southern, Contains so many Islands, that the certain Number of them is not yet known.

Modern Authors distribute it into 5 Divisions:

1. Molucco
2. Moro
3. Papuas
4. Celebes
5. Amboyna

Moloc means the Head, because it is the Chief of all about it. 

Others will have to be Malucco, which, in Arabick, imports, the Kingdom, as the Principal of them. 

It Contains five most Remarkable Islands, all of them under the same Meridian, one in sight of another, their whole Extent being 25 Leagues; the Equinoctial crossing them, so that the most Northern of them has but half a Degree of Latitude that way, and the most Southern, one Degree on the other side. Near to them, on the East, is the Island Gilolo, by the Portugueses call’d Batochina de Moro, and by the Moluccos, 

Alemaera. Among all the others lying about them, call’d also Moluccos, as we say the Canaries, the Terceras, or the Oreades, these are the most Remarkable, for their great Plenty of Spice. The Names of them, beginning with the Northermost, are, Ternate, Tydore, Motiel, Machian, and Bachian; by the ancient Heathens call’d, Cape, Duco, Moutil, Mara, and Seque. 

This last, which is Bachian, is divided into many Islands, seperated from one another by little Channels, Navigable only in small Vessels; for which reason, as also because it is under one Soveraign, it has but one Name, and all the Molucco Islands are Subject to three Kings. They are divided by small Arms of the Sea, and some Desert little Islands, as also by their Antient Enmity. The Coast both near the Shore, and farther off at Sea, full of Dangerous Shoals; among which there are some Inlets, where the Ships Ride in Safety. The Soil of them all is generally Dry and Spungy, sucking up all the Water, tho’ it Rains never so much, and in many Places the Brooks that run down from the Mountains do not reach the Sea. According to that grave Historian John de Barros, these Islands afford an ill Prospect, and are no way pleasant to behold; because the Sun being always so near them, sometimes passing over towards the Northern, and some times towards the Southern Solstice, the natural Damp of the Earth fills them so full of Trees, and [7]Plants, that it thickens the Air, and hinders the Sight; for by reason of the Earthly Vapours, the Trees are never naked of Leaves; but before one falls another has sprung out; and the same is among Herbs. Others affirm, they are Pleasant to look to, but not Healthy, especially for Strangers, who are all subject to the Disease call’d Berber, which is common in that Country. This Malady swells the Body, and disables the Limbs, but is cur’d with Cloves, the Wine of the Philippine Islands, drank with Ginger, and the use of a certain Herb, known to the Natives; and the Dutch do it with the juyce of Lemmons, a Remedy found by their own Apprehension, and Experience.

Providence has stor’d these Spice-Islands with Bananas, Coco-Nuts, Product of the Moluccos. Oranges, Lemmons, Lignum-Aloes, Sanders, Cinamon, Mace, Mastick-Trees, but above all, with abundance of Cloves, and other Plants; all of them valuable for their Fruit, or delightful for their Ornaments. They have neither Wheat nor Rice; but Nature gave them Industry, and Matter to supply this Defect. They beat a sort of Tree, like the Wild-Palm, with Mallets made of strong Canes; and those dry Trunks, so batter’d, yield an extraordinary white Flower, coming from the bruized Pith; which they mould up in square Pipkins, and this is the Sagu, or Landan, so made into square Loaves, Sagu. like the Castile Sope. This Plant is about Fifteen Foot high, and from the Top of it sprout out some Branches, like those which produce the Tamarinds. These bear a Fruit like the Cypress-Nuts, in which there are certain fine Hairs, which if they touch a Man’s Flesh, burn it. From the tender Branches of the same Plant cut, flows the Liquor which serves them for Drink, putting the Ends of the said Branches so cut into narrow Mouth’d Vessels, which are fill’d in a Night, and the Liquor so gather’d, is like Milk Whipped, and Frothy, which they call Tuac. When Drank new, it is Sweet and very Fat’ning; boil’d like new Wine it tastes like Wine, and after grows sharp as Vinegar. 

The same Advantage they reap from two other Plants call’d Nipo, and Coco; the last of them yields also Oyl, Boards, and Timber to build Houses. They also Drink another pleasant Liquor, which Nature has shut up in the Hollow of the Canes they call Bambooes, so large that the Knots are a Yard a sunder. They abound in Flesh; but the People are more affected to Fish; notwithstanding Hugo, the Dutchman, says they want both. Providence afforded them no Mines, either of Gold, or Silver; whether it was a Punishment, or Mercy we do not decide. Neither have they found any, of other less precious Metals; but not far from them is Lambuco, an Island abounding in Iron and Steel; whence, and from the Mines of Sula and Butva, the people of the Maluccos bring them, to make their Caampilanes, which are sharp heavy Cymiters, and their Crises, being small Daggers. The Portugueses and Dutch have now furnish’d those Islands with small Fire-Arms, and Cannon of all sorts known among us.

