---
heading: Book 1b
linkTitle: Book 1b
title: "Portugueses Pretentions to the Moluccos"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---



Ternate is the Capital City, and Court of that King, near to which a A burning Mountain in Ternate. dreadful burning Mountain Flames out, about the Equinoxes, because at those Times the Winds blow; which kindle that natural Fire, on the Matter that has fed it so many Ages. The Top of the Mountain, which exhales it, is cold, and not cover’d with Ashes, but with asort of light cloddy Earth, little different from the Pomice-Stone burnt in our Fiery Mountains. [8]Descending thence to the Foot of the Hill, which stretches out like a Piramid, down to the Plain; it is all uncooth, being thick with Trees, whose Verdure is spar’d by the Flames, and the very Fire, Waters and Moistens them with Brooks, which it draws together in the Hollow of the Mountain, and forces it to Sweat, and pour out.

People of Ternate. The Natives Differ from one another, as it were through a Miraculous Bounty of Nature; for it has made the Women Fair and Beautiful, and the Men, of a darker Colour than a Quince; their Hair lank, and many anoint it with sweet Oyls. Their Eyes are large, the Eyebrows long, which, and their Eye-lashes, they colour Black. Of Body they are Strong, much addicted to War, and sloathful for all other Employments. They are long Liv’d; grow grey earlie; and are as Active by Sea as by Land; Officious, and Courteous to Strangers; but when they grow Familiar, Importunate, and Troublesome in their Requests; in their Dealings, all bent upon Interest; Jealous, Fraudulent, and False. They are Poor, and therefore Proud; and to name many Vices in one, Ungrateful.

Religion, Manners, Laws. The Chineses possess’d themselves of these Islands, when they subdu’d all those Eastern Parts; and after them the Javeneses, and the Malayes, and lastly the Persians, and Arabs; which last, together with their Trade, Introduc’d the Mahometan Superstition among the Worship of their Gods; from whom some Families boasted they were descended. Their Laws are Barbarous: They have no limited Number of Wives. The King’s chief Wife, call’d in their Language Putriz, enables and gives the Right of Succession to which her Sons are preferr’d, tho’ younger than those by other Mothers. Theft is not pardon’d, tho’ never so inconsiderable; but Adultery easily. When the Dawn appears, Officers appointed by Law for that purpose, beat a sort of broad, flat Tabors about the Streets, to awake Marry’d People, who they think deserves this Care from the Government, on account of Procreation. Most Crimes are punish’d with Death; in other Respects they Obey the Will, or Tyranny of the Conqueror.

Their Habit. The Men, on their Heads, wear Turkish Turbants of several Colours, with abundance of Feathers on them. The King’s ends above like a Miter, and serves instead of a Crown. For their other Garb they all wear Wastecoats, which they call Cheninas, and Blew, Crimson, Green, and Purple Breeches. Of the same they make their Cloaks, or Mantles, which are short, Soldier-like, thrown over, or knotted on the Shoulder, after the Ancient Roman manner, known by the written Descriptions, Statues, and other Monuments of those Times. The Women are Proud of their Hair; sometimes they spread, and sometimes they plat it, sticking abundance of Flowers among the Ribbons, which hold it together; so that in their Dress, they are not encumber’d with loose Viels, Plumes, or Feathers. All that variety adorns them without Art; they wear Bracelets, Pendants, and Necklaces of Diamonds and Rubies, and great Strings of Pearls, which are not forbid even the meanest, no more than Silks, wherein the Women particularly are Clad after the Persian and Turkish Fashion; and all this costly Attire is the Product of the Neighbouring Lands and Seas. Both Men and Women in their Habit show their natural Haughtiness.



Language. The variety of Languages among them is great, for sometimes one Town does not understand the People of the next; the Malaye Tongue is most [9]us’d, as easiest to pronounce. This Diversity of Languages shows, that those Islands were Peopled by several Nations. In those Parts all Antiquity, and the Art of Navigation are ascrib’d to the Chineses. Some affirm, That the People of the Molucco Islands are Descended from the Jaos, who settled there being invited by the Fragrancy of the Spice. They loaded their Vessels with Cloves, till then unknown, and holding on that Trade, carry’d it to the Gulphs of Arabia, and Persia. They Sail’d about all those Countries, transporting Silks, and Porcelance, the Product, and Manufacture of China. The Cloves were by the Persians, and Arabs transmitted to the Greeks, and Romans. Some Roman Emperors had a design of Conquering the East, till they should come to the Spicy Countries; so covetous were they of that Commodity; and believing they all came from China, call’d all those People Chineses. The Spaniards formerly brought them among other Goods from the Red-Sea. The Kings of Egypt for some time possess’d themselves of all the Spice which they Transmitted from the How Cloves were brought into Europe. Hands of the Asiaticks into Europe. This the Romans continu’d, when they reduc’d Egypt into the Form of a Province. Long after, the Genoeses, Transferring the Trade to Theodosia, now Caffa, handed them about to all Parts; and there the Venetians, and other Trading Nations, had their Consuls, and Factors. They afterwards were convey’d over the Caspian Sea and Trabisond; but this Trade fell with the Eastern Empire; and then the Turks carry’d them in Caravans of Camels, and Dromedaries to Berytus, Aleppo, Damascus, and several Ports on the Mediterranean. The Sultans of Egypt brought them back to the Red-Sea, and thence to Alexandria, down the Nile. The Portugueses having Conquer’d the East-Indies, took them from Egypt, and brought them in their Fleets by the Cape of Good Hope, sinking and taking all Ships that attempted to carry any to Grand Cayro. For that purpose they kept Squadrons on the Coasts of Arabia and Persia, and at Cape Guardafu. By this means the Trade of Egypt was surpress’d, and all the Spice brought on the Kings account to India, and thence taking a prodigious compass, to Lisbon. He who is Master at Sea will be possess’d of this Wealth; by which, and other Commodities, we see that is made good, which some write Themistocles was wont to say, That he has all things who has the Sea.

The Kings, Boleyfe, of Ternate, and Almanzor, of Tydore, contended about Entertaining Serrano, and each of them courted him to build a Fort in his Island. It is well worth Observation, To see how eagerly these Kings sought after, and begg’d for that which they were soon after to be averse to. They writ about it to the King of Portugal; but Antony de Miranda coming to the Moluccos, besides a wooden Fort, or House he built at Talangame, erected another at Machian, an Island belonging to the two Kings, by which means he satisfy’d the Request of both. Soon after Cachil Laudin, King of Bachian, made Application to Don Tristan de Meneses, on the same account. Don Tristan was come to the Moluccos to Load Spice, and with a design to carry away Francis Serrano, and to induce Boleyfe to consent to it, he perswaded him, it was requisite that Serrano should go to Portugal, to prevail upon King Emanuel to order the Fort he desir’d, to be built upon Ternate, and not elsewhere. Boleyfe approv’d of his design, and to that end, sent Cachilato, as his Embassador, with [10]Serrano. Don Tristan set out, and his Ships being dispers’d in a Storm, was oblig’d to return to the Moluccos, and to Winter in the Wooden House above mention’d; but as soon as the Monson blew, he put to Sea again, and touching at Bachian was inform’d, That they had kill’d some Portugueses, of Simon Correa’s Vessel in that Island. This troubled him, but he dissembled it, and proceeding on his Voyage, return’d to Malaca, by the way of Amboyna.

Brito at the Molucco’s. Antony de Brito, appointed by the Governour of India to succeed Serrano in that Post, Sail’d from Cape Sincapura, through the Streights of Sabam, with 300 Men, and some experienc’d Commanders. He touch’d at Tuban, a City in the Island of Jaua, and went over to another, call’d Agazim, a Mart in those Parts, opposite to the Island Madura. Its nearness inviting him, he sent a Roving Vessel thither to get some Information what Course he was to Steer. Seventeen Men there were in the Vessel Landed on the Coast, and went up along the side of a River, cover’d with beautiful Trees, whose Fruit deceiv’d the Sailers; for they attracted with the pleasant sight, and unexpected satisfaction, forgot to secure their Vessel. The Natives observing the Opportunity, first took the Vessel, and then all the Men, whose Ransom prov’d afterwards difficult, tho’ the Lord of the City favour’d it. Brito sail’d directly for the Moluccos, and touching at Bachian, sent Simon de Abreu in all haste to burn a Village, and kill all the Inhabitants, in Revenge for Simon Correa’s Companions slain there; that King Laudin might understand, they should not escape unpunish’d, who wrong’d the Portuguese, and that since his Island was the first that took up Arms King of Ternate Dies. against them, it should also be the first that felt their Vengeance. He executed his severity without any Loss, tho’ that King did not forget the Obligation he laid on him. Brito went on to Tydore, and was Inform’d by Almanzor of the Disorders there were at Ternate, because Boleyfe was dead, and it was suppos’d he had been Poyson’d. He being near his Death order’d, That during the Minority of his eldest Son Cachil Bohat, or Boyano, the Queen his Wife, who was Daughter to the King of Tydore, should Govern; and that Cachil Daroes, Natural Son to the said Boleyfe, should Act jointly with her. The Queen who was Crafty, suspecting that her Father Almanzor might under that colour aim st some Advantage, to the Detriment of her Son, call’d her Subjects together and told them, That it was enough for her to take care of her Sons Education; and therefore she laid the greatest stress of Government on Cachil Daroes.

The King, and the Governour Daroes, expected the Commander Antony Brito, as the Kingdoms, and the young Kings Protector. They went out to A Fort Built at Ternate. meet him in a Fleet of Carcoas, with the Noise of that Barbarous Musick of Brass Basons, and Tabors. He Landed, shewing State, and appearing worthy of that Applause; visited the Queen, the King, and his Brothers; and after the Ceremony of Condoling the Death of Boleyfe, ordering Affairs in Conjunction with Daroes, he approv’d of that Form of Government, and upon all occasions Defended his Province against that of Tydore. To do this with the greatest Security, he pitch’d upon a proper spot of Ground, according to the Rules of Fortification, which were not then very perfect, no more than Military Discipline. The Foundation being dug, Brito, in the presence of the King, and all the People, laid the first Stone of the new Fort, with his own Hand. This happen’d on Midsummer Day, and therefore [11]he gave the Fort the Name of St. John Baptist; and tho’ it was built for the Defence of Ternate, yet in Brito’s mind it was Dedicated to the service of the Gospel, and its Ministers. He us’d endeavours to send away the Caeiz he found there spreading of Mahomet’s false Doctrine, as an Obstacle to the True; but the War which is there always settled and natural against Tydore, obstructed these Designs; tho’ at the same time the Troubles of those two Revengeful Nations increas’d the Revenues of Portugal, by contributing of their Spice: and the desire of Superiority brought them into Subjection. However, in Portugal Brito had a Successor appointed him, and he was inform’d, That the other was already sailing for the Moluccos; and there was need enough of them both, and of doubling their Forces; because Spain still insisted upon taking those Countries as its Right, and Brito began to be hated, on account of his offering Violence to the Royal Family.

At the same time Magellan having Sail’d 600 Leagues towards Malaca, Magellan goes over to Spain. was in certain Islands, whence he corresponded with Serrano; who having thriv’d so well in Ternate, with Boleyfe, sent his Friend word what Kindness, and Wealth he had receiv’d from him; advising him to return to his Company. Magellan consenting, resolv’d to go to the Moluccos; but in case his Services were not Rewarded in Portugal, as he expected, he would take the way directly for Ternate, under whose King Serrano grew so Rich in Nine Years. He consider’d, that since the Moluccos were 600 Leagues East from Malaca, which make 30 Degrees, little more or less, they were out of the Portuguese Limits, according to the antient Sea Chart. Returning to Portugal, he found no Favour, but thought himself wrong’d, and resenting it, went away into Castile, carrying with him a Planisphere, drawn by Peter Reynel; by which, and the Correspondence he had held with Serrano, he perswaded the Emperor, Charles V. that the Molucco Islands belong’d to him. It is reported, That he Confirm’d his Opinion with Writings, and the Authority of Ruy Faleyro, a Portuguese Judiciary Astrologer, and much more with Serrano’s.

Hereupon the Emperor gave him the Command of a Squadron, with which he sail’d from Sanlucar, on the 21st. of September, 1519. He stay’d Sets out on his Discovery. four days at the Canaries, where a Caravel overtook him, with private Intelligence, that his Captains went with a Design not to Obey him particularly John Cartagena, who had the same Commission as Magellan. He bravely seem’d to take no notice, and sailing away with a fair Wind, being pass’d Rio de Janeyro, in the Province of Santa Cruz, commonly call’d Brazil, the Sea growing very cold, and much more the River of Plate, which is in 35 Degrees of South Latitude, the Captains question’d him about the Voyage, since they could nor find the Cape, or Streight, they went in search of. He answer’d, as to Men that were entirely Subordinate to his Direction and Authority, That they must go on, for he knew what he was about, and the Coasts of Norway and Ireland were in a greater Latitude, and yet Ships sailed along them. These Contests lasted almost all the Voyage, and increas’d with the cold and dreadful Winds, and the hideous sight of the Mountains of Snow and Ice, grown old, which they met in the Latitude of 52 and 53 Degrees. They magnify’d these Difficulties, alledging, That it requir’d six, or seven Months to come from Castile, [12]cross the Line, and run all along the Coast of Brazil, through such diversity of Climates, in each of which the Weather vary’d. That this was throwing away Men and Ships, which were more valuable than all the Cloves in the Molucco Islands.

The Astrologer, Ruy Faleyro, being Distracted, was left in the Mad-House He discovers the Streight of his Name. at Sevil; and in his Place went Andrew de San Martin, to whom Magellan gave Ear, as to what he said of the Weather; but not in other Cases, as some lay to his Charge, and with such Moderation and Integrity, as becomes Christian Piety. Nor is it to be believ’d, That Magellan should consult such a Deceitful a Science as Judiciary Astrology, upon such difficult Points, or should prefer it before Astronomy, amidst such dreadful Dangers. The Hardships became intollerable; and Discord so far prevail’d with the Captains, John de Cartagena, Gaspar Quesada, and Lewis de Mendoza, that they resolved either to Kill, or Secure Magellan. This Conspiracy coming to his Ears, as he lay at the Mouth of the River of St. Julian, having contriv’d what was to be done, as John de Barros writes, he caus’d Lewis de Mendoza to be Stab’d, which was done by Gonzalo de Espinosa. Next Gaspar de Quesada was Quarter’d Alive; and a Servant of his, who was concern’d, had his Pardon. Cartagena he condemned to a lingering Death, leaving him in that Desert Country, with a Clergy Man, guilty of the same Crime, which was High Treason against their King. So say the Portuguese Histories; but the Spanish inform us, That they were privately proceeded against, and the Judgment was Read to them. This done he made some Speeches to Justify the Fact, and Comfort his Companions. Cartagena, and the Clergy-Man, who were left with some Provisions, got away a few days after, in one of the Ships of the same Squadron, which return’d to Spain. Magellan overcoming incredible Difficulties, found the Streight, and Passage, which makes the Communication between the two Seas, and preserves his Name to this Day. He there took Giants above fifteen Spans high, who wanting raw Flesh, which they us’d to feed on, soon Dy’d; then he passed the Streight successfully. But tho’ he got under the Equinoctial, either by reason of the Currents, or the Faultiness of the Sea Charts, he Sail’d round about, and almost in sight of the Molucco Islands, yet could never come at them. He Touch’d at others, where he was oblig’d to Fight; and went on to those of Zebu, or the Manilas. At this same time his Friend Serrano was sailing for India, and tho’ it happen’d in several Places, yet they both Dy’d on the same Day, and much after the same Manner.

It would be superfluous to dilate upon the Story of Magellan, his tedious Navigation, and the many Difficulties he met with, before and after he pass’d through his Streight into the Pacifick, or South-Sea; his Arrival at the Island of Zebu, and perswading the Idolatrous King to embrace the Christian Faith, and the Battles he fought on his account, with his Enemies; for besides that these things are Related by very good Authors who Treat of the Discovery of the Molucco Islands, which was the main Object of his desperate Undertaking, we must be brief in repeating them, to show how eager several Princes, and Nations were for these Islands, and the Notion they had of what great Consequence they would be to them.

The King of Zebu was Baptiz’d, rather to make his Advantage of the [13]Spanish Arms, than out of any Zeal, or that he knew the Faith he Embrac’d. He took the Name of Ferdinand in Baptism, to flatter his Godfather, who He is Murder’d with others. was Ferdinand Magalhaens, himself. After obtaining several Victories by his Assistance, thinking he could shake off the second Yoke he expected those Strangers might lay on him, he turn’d against them. He contriv’d an Entertainment, in Honour of Magellan and Thirty five Spaniards being at it, he fell upon them at a time appointed, with a Multitude of Barbarians, and confounding the Feast, murder’d his Guests, who handled their Arms to defend themselves, which only serv’d to render their Deaths more Honourable. The rest of the Spaniards, who escap’d because they were at Sea, for their better Government under that Misfortune, presently chose Barbosa, a Kinsman of Magalhaens, for their General, and Lewis Alfonso, a Portuguese to be Captain of the Ship, call’d the Victory. The perfidious King, thinking to conceal his Treachery and Apostacy, as if it were possible to keep it secret, sent to invite Barbosa, saying he would deliver him the Jewel he had promis’d for the King of Spain. John Serrano, thinking it a Rashness, to trust a Man again, whose Hands were still Bloody with the late Execution, disswaded Barbosa from accepting of the Invitation; but was not regarded. Barbosa went with the other Guests, and Serrano himself, who, to show it was not Fear that mov’d him to give such Advice, was the first that got into the Boat. They were conducted into a Wood of Palm-Trees, where the King expected them, with a small Retinue, the Tables being spread in the Shade, amidst the Musick of Bag-Pipes. When they were seated, and began to Eat, a great number of Archers that lay in Ambush, rush’d out, and shot our Men. They saved Serrano, whom they lov’d, not out of Kindness, for they show’d him bound to those that were at Sea, demanding for his Ransom, two Brass Guns, and then he told them, the Slaughter that had been made. Our Men, not trusting to them, any longer, set Sail, and did not only see the Indians carry Serrano back to their Town, but soon after heard mighty Shouts in it; and it was afterwards known that they gave them when they killed Serrano, and ran to throw down a great Cross, set up before the New-Church, which they could not perform. The Spaniards wanting Men, burnt the Ships, call’d the Conception, and chose John Caravallo for their General, and Gonzalo Gomez de Espinosa, Captain of the Ship the Victory. They came to Borneo, on the Coast whereof they found those Peoples Fleet of Carcoas, Painted, and the Prows of them like Serpents Heads gilt.

The Soldiers appear’d well Arm’d, who having spy’d our Ship, acquainted Soldiers of Borneo, and Reception of Spaniards. their King with it. He order’d 2000 of his Guard to go out, and receive them, before they reach’d the City. These Men came brandishing their Bows and poison’d Arrows, Trunks, Cymitars, and Sheilds, and wore Breast-plates made of Tortois Shells, and encompass’d an Arm’d Elephant, on whose Back there was a wooden Castle. When the Spaniards came up the Elephant stoop’d down, and six arm’d Men coming out of the Castle, put Gonzalo Gomez de Espinosa, who was then General, into it. Thus attended, he went to Visit the King, in whose Presence his Secretary spoke to him through a Trunk, and Espinosa gave him an Account of the King of Zebu’s Perfidiousness. All condol’d the Accident, and our Men taking Leave Sail’d away for the Molucco Islands, being reliev’d with what they wanted, and furnish’d with able Pilots. [14]

Not far from Borneo, they met 150 Sail, whereof they took two Junks, Spaniards at Tydore. in which they found an Hundred Men, five Women, a Son of the King of Luzon, and an Infant two Months Old. This they thought would be a sufficient Ransom to recover their Companions; so they let go the Prince upon his Parole, he promising to restore them the Captive Spaniards. They had some Storms; but arriv’d at Tydore, on the 8th of November 1521. When Almanzor heard the salute of the Canon, he sent to enquire what People they were, and presently after he came to our Ships in a little Boat. His Shirt appear’d woven with Gold and Silk, a white Cloth which trail’d being girt over it. About his Head a fine Veil of several Colours, made like a Persian Miter: Being Aboard the Commodore, the Relations of that Voyage say, he stopp’d his Nose with his Fingers, either at the Smell of our Meat, or of the Ship. Mahometanism was newly come into his Island, and most of his Subjects, especially those Inhabiting the Mountains, ador’d Idols. He bid our Men wellcome, gave them good Words, and afterwards was as kind in his Actions; and being inform’d of their past Sufferings, gave them leave to load Cloves. They presented him with a Chair of Crimson Velvet, a Robe of Yellow Velvet, a great Loose Coat of false Cloth of Gold, a piece of Yellow Damask, four Yards of Scarlet Cloth; Handkercheifs, and Towles, wrought with Silk, and Gold; Drinking-Glasses, Glass Beads, Looking-Glasses, Knives, Scizers, and Combs. They gave his Son another parcel of Gifts, and a Cap, and did the like by his Cachiles and Sangiacks. When they ask’d the Kings leave in the Emperors Name to Trade, he granted it, adding they should kill any that offer’d to hinder them. He seriously view’d his Majesty’s Picture and Arms on the Standard, and desired to see our Coin. And pretending to be an Astrologer, or Soothsayer, or as others say, having Dreamt, or Guess’d it, or being told it by Chinese Priests, he said, He knew the Christians were to come to his Lands for Spice; and desired that they would not leave him. Ally with that King. They treated about an Alliance, and when they were agreed, two Tydores brought something in their Hands to the Ships, which they afterwards understood was the Alcoran, tho’ at first they did not, because cover’d with Silks, and Strings. Almanzor lay’d his Hands on it, and then on his Head, and Breast; and this was the Ceremony of his Swearing Friendship, and Fealty to the Crown of Castile, and that he would allow them Cloves, and all Commerce for ever. Then the General Espinosa, in the Emperor’s Name, before an Image of the blessed Virgin, swore to protect them both in Peace and War, and presented King Almanzor with Thirty Indians he had taken Prisoners. Soon after, as some Authors affirm, Corala, Prince of Ternate, Nephew to Almanzor, came to Tydore to swear Fealty in like manner, as did Luzuf, King of Gilolo, of whom it is Written, That he had Six Hundred Sons, and that Almanzor had Two Hundred Wives. These Kings Writ to the Emperor; ratifying their Fealty, and Sebastian del Cano sail’d away in the Ship, the Victory, by the way the Portugueses use, with the Letters and Instruments; the General Espinosa returning towards Panama, for Castilla del Oro on the Continent of America, to pass thence to Spain.

At this time the new Governor, Don Garcia Henriquez, was under Sail, to succeed Antony Brito, and being come to Banda, waited for the Monson [15]to carry him to Ternate. Monson is the Name by which the Portuguese Monson, what it is. call the Wind, which blows six Months to carry them to India, and then six Months again to bring them back. There he furnished himself with all Necessaries for the Fort built by Brito. He had need so to do, for he received Advice, That Spanish Ships were sailing thro’ the Bays, and openest Parts of the Archipelago. He sent to discover them, by the Industry of his Soldiers, and being receiv’d at Ternate, view’d the Fort, and observ’d the posture of the Government. He proposed a Peace with Cachil Almanzor, King of Tydore. We shall have frequent Occasion to repeat these Words Cachil and Sangiack. Cachil is perhaps deriv’d from Katil, which in Arabick Cachil and Sangiack, their significations. is the same as among us, a Valiant Soldier. In the Molucco Islands they Honour their Nobility with this Title, which is something more than Don in Spain. The Title of Sangiack, which answers to that of Duke, or Earl, might come from Senchaq; which in the Turkish Language, imports a Commander: To conclude this Peace, he thought it convenient to secure the Royal Family; which he accordingly executed, and though he colour’d it with fair Pretexts, they plainly perceived this was an Introduction towards Oppressing them, and show’d a mistrust. We may safely affirm, This was the first Distaste which, as being a notorious Wrong, Portugueses, why hated. disturb’d that Nation, and from that time they grew Cold, and Jealous, thinking themselves oblig’d to seek Revenge; and this Action was the occasion of all the ensuing Slaughters, as we often see a great Fire rise from one small Spark.

Cachil Daroes endeavour’d to obstruct this Peace, as Tutor, and Governor, fearing the Trade of Cloves would be transferr’d to Tydore, to the Destruction of the Infant King’s Dominions. But notwithstanding this Opposition, the Peace was concluded, upon certain Conditions, as, That the King of Tydore should deliver a Ship he had taken, the Canon, and some More of their Outrages. runaway Portuguese. Almanzor, who stood in need of a Peace, and the Friendship of the Portuguese, to gain the Affection of Cachil Daroes, propos’d to Marry him to one of his Daughters. Don Garcia believing that this Union among them would produce that of their Forces, and less Submission to the Portuguese’s Dominion, to obstruct this dangerous Alliance, sent to the King of Tydore to borrow the Canon. That King excus’d himself, alledging, that he had lent it a few days before, to the King of Bachian. Cachil Daroes complying with him, agreed to all the Articles. Don Garcia being dissatisfy’d, waited an opportunity to break all that Contrivance, and be Reveng’d. Almanzor fell Sick, and desir’d Don Garcia to send him a Physician; who sent an Apothecary, and he either not understanding Physick, or, as was believ’d, by order of Don Garcia, kill’d the Patient. Manifest tokens of Poyson afterwards appear’d. The Funeral was order’d, and at the same time the Commander, Don Garcia, appear’d in the Morning, in a parcel of Carcoas, before Tydore. He sent Baldaya, the Clerk of the Fort, to demand the Canon, threatning War, in case of denial. The Regents excusing themselves at that time, with just Reasons, and particularly the Funeral Solemnity, when they were in the Height of the Ceremony of Burying their King, they heard the Shouts of Don Garcia’s Men giving the Assault. The Portuguese enter’d the City, firing the Houses, plundering and killing, which oblig’d the Tydores to abandon their [16]King’s Body, and fly to the Mountains. During their Absence, Don Garcia seized the Canon, and carry’d it away to Ternate. Those who had fled return’d, with some Apprehension, and found the City ruin’d hideous, and almost reduc’d to Ashes; but recovering from their Fright; they proclaim’d Cachil Raxamira, the Son of Almanzor, King. They committed the Education of him to Cachil Rade, his Kinsman, the War being declared between Ternate and the New King of Tydore, who was seasonably supported by the Spaniards that came to his Country.

Spanish Ship first round the World. The Ship Victory returning into Spain, with the Letters from the King of the Molucco Islands, which the Emperor receiv’d, he was more fully convinc’d, that these Islands were within his Limits. Their Wealth, and his Right to them were so lively represented to him, that he order’d another Squadron of four Ships, two Galloons, and an Advice Boat to be made ready at Corunna, to be Commanded by the Commendary Fray Garcia de Loaysa, a Gentleman of Biscay, and under him, as Vice-Admiral, Sebastian del Cano, and the Captains Don Rodrigo de Acunna, James de Vera, &c. They Sail’d on the Eve of St. James the Apostle, 1525, touch’d at Gomera, and running along the Coast of Guinea, could not make Cape St. Augustine for want of Wind. By reason of this Calm, all agreeing to it, he alter’d his Course to the Cape of Good Hope. A Portuguese Ship guided them to

Another Squadron passes Magellans Streights. the Island of St. Matthew, which is Desert, and full of lofty Orange Trees, where they saw Hens, the Track of wild Boars, and some Portuguese Words carv’d on Trees, which shew’d they had pass’d that way. The Ships leaving them, they pass’d Cape St. Augustine, making for the Streights of Magellan. In this Course they endur’d Storms, and Err’d in their Accounts. Sebastian del Cano struck on a Shoal, and was reliev’d. The Galloons and Advice Boat made New Spain. The Admiral, by the Advice of Cano, pass’d the Equinoctial, upon information, That in 12 Degrees of South Latitude, he would find certain Islands that were rich in Gold and Silver. All the Men sickn’d, the Admiral, and Cano dy’d, with some others. The remains of the Squadron choosing Toribio de Salazar for their Commander, return’d under the Line; but he dy’d at the Islands de las Velas, now call’d Ladrones, or of Thieves. After some Strife, Martin Iniguez, and Ferdinand de Bustamante succeeded him, and agree’d to Command by turns. Thus divided they came in sight of Mindanao, and thence to the Molucco Islands, took in some Refreshment at Cope, a Town of the Island Moratay, whence they went on to Camafo, of Morotoja, whose Sangiack is Subject to the King of Tydore.

War betwixt Spaniards and Portugueses. They proceeded through the Gulph of Camafo, where they were Inform’d by the Ship of Don George de Meneses, who had been forc’d thither by the Currents, that the Portugueses held the Fort of Ternate, and Don Garcia made War on Tydore. Iniguez, and Bustamante offer’d them the Assistance of Spain, by which, coming so opportunely, they gain’d the Affections of them all, and furnished themselves with Necessaries. Don Garcia being already provided against the new Enemy, gather’d some Carcoas, and tho’ he could not perswade Daroes, the Tutor, to go along with him, oppos’d the Spaniards. First the Portuguese sent an Admonition, wherein he offer’d them Peace, and Entertainment, as Subjects to the Emperor, who was so near Ally’d to the King of Portugal; protesting, That the Molucco [17]Islands were within his Limits. This avail’d nothing, and Daroes Embarking in 12 Carcoas, with Emanuel Falcao, sent that Protestation in Writing, and in case it was Rejected, to declare War. The Spanish Commander receiv’d the Lawyer that was to make the Protestation, with much Civility Portuguese and Spanish War. and Respect, and answer’d, That the Molucco Islands belong’d to the Crown of Castile, and therefore he, in the Emperors Name, required Don Garcia not to break the Peace establish’d between their Kings. After all they were oblig’d to have recourse to Arms. Iniguez Landed on Tydore, strengthen’d the Works, and furnish’d them with Canon. The Portuguese follow’d, and both sides Firing, there was a great Slaughter; but those of Ternate retir’d so disorderly, that the Tydores remain’d Victors. However neither the Protestations, nor the War ceas’d, the Spaniards urging Magellan’s Discovery, and the Portuguese, Serrano’s, and Brito’s. The Tydores and Spaniards took some Carcoas belonging to Gilolo, in which they kill’d a Portuguese, and some Ternates, as also a Champan Laden with Provisions for Talangame.
