---
heading: Book 8
linkTitle: Book 8
title: "Madagascar"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


On the 24th they reach’d the Island of Madagascar, or of S. Laurence, and saw abundance of Whales. Here the plentiful Distribution of Wine ceas’d, and it began to be given out more sparingly, to lament by this Abstinence, the Death of John Pomer, a skilful Sailor.

On the 27th they pass’d Cape S. Sebastian, and on the 30th Cape S. Julian. On the 4th of September, it was debated whether they should make for the Island of Banda, or put into the Bay of Anton Gill. They came to no Resolution at that Time, tho’ they afterwards arriv’d separately at Banda, and at several Times. On the 17th they discover’d, at a great Distance, the Island of Cerne, by others call’d the Isle of Swans, which is high and mountainous, and for Joy of the Water they expected to take in there, they gave every Man three Cups of Wine. Before that, the Vice-Admiral went ashore with five Men, in another little Island, and taking a View of it, found a Noble Spacious Harbour, well land-lock’d, into which a Rivulet of fresh They land in a small Island. Water fell. They put in and refitted their shatter’d Vessels, finding 14 Fathom Water. 

They had not Landed in four Months, and therefore in Thanksgiving, and because it was then Fair Time in Holland, they made a Sort of Chappel; on the Bodies of Trees, and covering it with Leaves, preach’d there twice a Day, in Honour of the Fair. They eat Abundance of Fowl, which they could almost take with their Hands, and drank Wine more plentifully.

A Native of Madagascar, who came along with them, and had been taken in a former Voyage, was, by the Instruction of those Sermons, made a Christian, and baptiz’d, taking the Name of Laurence. They found no Inhabitants in the Island though it was Delightful. [158]

Clear Water in the Sea.

On the 28th and 29th, they observ’d they were upon a very Christalline Water, without any other Tokens of their being near Land, and those same Days at Noon, they had the Sun in the Zenith, directly over their Heads, which had happen’d to them at other Times. Here a Storm separated the Ships; the Maurice, which was Admiral, by them in Latin call’d Prætoria, the Holland, and the Overissel, tho’ they endeavour’d to Cerne Island. make Java, were drove by Stress of Weather to Banda; and the other five to the Island Cerne, or of Swans, leaving six other smaller on the Right Hand. 

They enter’d the Port with ten Fathom Water, between two Mountains, which contract the Mouth of it. The Situation of it is in 21 Degrees of South Latitude, and is five Leagues in Compass. The Port is Spacious enough to contain 50 Ships, and shelter’d against all Winds. They were so well pleas’d with the Island, that they chang’d its ancient Name of Cerne, or of Swans, for that of Maurice, in Honour of Count Maurice of Nassau, Bastard Son to the Prince of Orange, so well known in our Days. Discoverers were sent about it, and return’d without finding any humane Track, nor Signs of any Habitation. They had a doubtful Tame Birds and Beasts. Proof hereof in the Birds and Beasts; for they ran into their Hands and alighted on their Heads, as they might have done on the Branches of Trees, or had they been bred Tame; which Boldness proceeded either from their having never seen Men, or being grown very familiar with them.

Strange Bats. 

Among the rest, there are Bats, which have Heads as big, and like Apes, and these sleep considerable Numbers of them together, and hanging on the Trees, with their Legs and Wings extended. The Air and Soil are so healthy and fit to be inhabited, that as soon as the Sick were landed, they recovered. The Land is high and mountainous, full of Woods, and not being inhabited, there are no Tracts or Paths through them. There Ebony. is an infinite Quantity of Ebony Trees, as black as Pitch, and as smooth as Ivory; the Trunks being cover’d with a rough Bark, preserve the Body solid. There are other Plants, whose Trunks are Red, and others Pale as Wax; delicious Coco-Nuts, vast Numbers of Palm-Trees, and some of them of such Sort, that one of their Leaves covers all a Man’s Body, and defends it against the Rain. 

They spread their Nets, and among the other Monstrous Thornback. Multitude of Fishes, took a Thornback so large, that it afforded two Meals Tortoises. for all the Men in the Ships. They saw Land Tortoises, so big, that one of them walk’d with four Soldiers sitting on its Back; and ten of them din’d upon the Shell of another, as if it had been a round Table. In a very short Time they kill’d Abundance of Turtle-Doves, and another Sort of Penguins. white Birds, bigger than our Swans, but as round as a Ball, and have only two or three curl’d Feathers in the Tail. There were so many blew Parrots, that they might have loaded their Ships with them. Indian Crows, twice as big as the European, of three several colour’d Feathers.

They erected Forges, dress’d all their Tools, and built another Vessel, to supply the Place of the Utrecht, which with the other two, had directed her Course for Madagascar. They again took a View of their Maurice Island, and towards the Inland Part of it, tho’ there were no Signs of any Wax found with Greek Characters. humane Habitation, found about three hundred Pounds weight of Wax, on which there were plain Greek Letters and Characters. They also saw Oars, Nets, and Pieces of Timber, being the Wreck of Ships. The Vice-Admiral, [159]providing a smooth square Board, carv’d on it the Arms of Holland, Zealand, and Amsterdam, and nail’d it on the Top of a Tree, as a Memorial of his being there, and giving the Name of MAURICE to the island, with this Inscription, which being in Spanish, denotes their Hatred to the Ancient Faith of our Nation, and being couch’d in one Line over their Arms, was, THE REFORM’D CHRISTIANS. 

Then they plow’d up a large Field, and sow’d it with Wheat, and other European Grain; turning lose some Hens, to see what Improvement they should find another Time. They again, for some Days, visited the Hills and Plains, and found no Track of Man.

Whilst these refresh’d themselves at the Island Cerne, or of Swans, being fourteen Days, the other three Ships arriv’d at S. Mary’s, a barren Island, S. Mary Island. tho’ some Orange and Lemon Trees grow in it, as also Sugar Canes, and there are Hens. About it, and in Sight of Land, there are monstrous Whales. They landed, but not without Opposition from the Natives, with whom they fought, and took their King; but he was easily ransom’d, a Strange Ransom for a King. Cow and a Calf being given them in Exchange for him. They saw the Manner of the Whale Fishery, which is very easy there. The Indians make up close to them in their Canoes, and stick them with a Harping-Iron they dart, being ty’d to Ropes made of the Barks of Trees. They stor’d their Ship with their Flesh and Oil, and some Oranges, and went over to the Bay of Anton Gil, where the Madagascar Indian, would not stay, as he had desired before, being now well affected to the Habit and Drunkenness of his Companions. They were toss’d backwards and forwards for five Days, between certain Islands, destitute of Provisions, and unsafe, by Reason they were in War among themselves.

They set forward with a fair Gale towards Java, and on the 26th of December, 1598, arriv’d at Banda, which is eight Leagues from Amboina. Banda Island. This Island is shap’d like a Horse-shooe, and lies in four Degrees of South Latitude. It is most fruitful, with little or no Improvement, in Nutmegs, and their precious Mace; as also Provisions and Medicines for Men, beyond all other Parts of the known World. It is divided into three Parts, each of them three Leagues in Compass. The Capital City is called Nera. As soon as they arriv’d, they contracted Friendship with the Islanders; tho’ a foreign Ship, to secure the Trade to herself, gave them to understand, that the Dutch were certain Pirates who fled the Year before, and had lain conceal’d at Sea, to come again and rob the Island, and therefore they did not fully credit them. This Notion was back’d by Trading Portugueses, and others settled there; but the Dutch sending their Abdol, that is the Indian Interpreter, with some Soldiers, and Gifts to present the King, according to the Custom of Merchants that come into his Country, they before him clear’d that Imputation, and defended their Innocence. 

The King was an Infant, and govern’d by his Cephates, that The Dutch settle Trade there. is his Vice-Roy, Tutor, or Protector, who set all right. They gave the King the Present before him, which he receiv’d very graciously. It consisted of certain valuable gilt Vessels, admirably ingrav’d, Christal Glasses, Looking-Glasses in gilt Frames, and Pieces of Velvet and Taffety. They deliver’d him Letters and Commissions of the States of Holland, Zealand, [160]and Count Maurice, with their Seals hanging to them in Form. All was accepted, and they lay down flat on the Ground to receive and read the Letters, with profound Reverence. The King promis’d to answer them, as he did, and immediately gave leave to Trade; whereupon the Dutch built Factories in the Island. They then expos’d in publick Shops great Store of Arms, Silks, Linnen and Cloth; as did the Natives their Spice, China Ware, and Pearls, and other Commodities the Neighbouring Islanders and Chineses bring hither to barter, and sell to one another. Five All their Ships meet again. Weeks after, the other three Ships arriv’d, and the people of the City hearing the Discharges of the Cannon, and seeing the Auncients spread abroad, for Joy of the Ships meeting again, came down to the Port, and encompass’d the Ships in Boats, offering them Plenty of Fowl, Eggs, Coco Nuts, Bananas, Sugar-Canes, and Cakes made of Rice-Flower. This dainty Feeding continu’d every Day, and they gave them a Weeks Provision for a Dutch Man for one Pewter Spoon. However they rais’d the Price of Pepper; but they pay’d for all with Pins and Needles, Knives, Spoons, Looking-Glasses, and little Tabors; and with those same Commodities, they purchas’d more valuable Goods at Sumatra, as also Provisions; when four of these eight Ships return’d Homewards, the others sailing for Ternate and the Moluccos.

The greatest Quantity, and best Commodity they took in here, was of The Nutmeg Tree. are few and weak; but in Banda there is a plentiful Crop, and they have much more Virtue. Nature has cloath’d its Mountains and Plains, with Woods and Groves of these Plants. They are like the European Pear-Trees, and their Fruit resembles Pairs, or rather in Roundness the Melocotones. When the Nutmegs blosom, they spread a cordial Fragrancy; by degrees they lose their Native Green, which is original in all Vegetables; and then succeeds a Blew, intermix’d with Grey, Cherry-Colour, and a pale Gold Colour, as we see in the Rainbow, tho’ not in that regular Division, but in Spots like the Jaspar Stone.

Infinite Numbers of Parrots, and other birds of various Plumage, most delightful to behold, come to sit upon the Branches, attracted by the sweet Odour.

The Nuts, when dry, cast off the Shell it grows cover’d with, and is the Mace, within which is a white Kernel, not so sharp in Taste as the Nut, and when dry is converted into its Substance. Of this Mace, which is hot and dry in the second Degree, and within the third, the Bandeses make a most Oil of Nutmeg. precious Oil to cure all Distempers in the Nerves, and Aches caus’d by cold.

Of these Nuts they choose the freshest, weightiest, fattest, juiciest, Virtues of Nutmeg. and without any Hole. With them they cure, or correct stinking Breath, clear the Eyes, comfort the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen, and digest Meat. They are a Remedy against many other Distempers, and serve to add outward Lustre to the Face. The Bandeses call the Mace of their Aromatick Nuts, Buna Pala. It was not known to the Greeks nor to Pliny, according to Averrois; tho’ Serapion, whether the true, or the suppositious, when he describes it, alledges Gallen’s Authority. It is true, the Chrisabolans he treated of, agree well enough with the Nutmegs in Colour and Shape. [161]

The Javaneses, Chineses, and Natives of the Moluccos resort to the City Mora, to barter for this precious Fruit, and load their Ships with it; and Merchants way of living at Banda. this is the Trade of that People, as is that of Clove to Ternate, Tydore, and the other Moluccos. The Merchants arriving in this Island, many of them contribute to make up a Sum, wherewith they purchase a Woman, to dress their Meat, and attend them. The Dutch did so from this first Time.

When they go away she is left Free, till they return the next Year; so that her Slavery commences with the Return of her Masters, and their Absence gives it an Intermission. Some of the Natives are Idolaters; but the greater Part Mahometans, and so superstitious, that the very Soldiers do not mount the Guard, till they have pray’d in the Mosques, so loud, that all Religion of Banda. the Neighbourhood can hear them. Nor must any Man go into them without washing his Feet, in great Vessels of Water, provided at the Door, by the publick. Their Prayers consist in these Words, Estagfer Ai’lah Estagfer Al’lah, Asgiv’d Ai’lahe, Asgiv’d Al’lahe, La Il’lahe Inla Ai’lah, Mu.amed resul At’lahi. When they utter these last Words, they stroke their Faces with their Hands, a Ceremony denoting much Devotion. 

The Words in English are; Pardon O God, Pardon O God. I prostrate my self to God. I prostrate my self to God. There is no other God but God, and Mahomet his Messenger: By these Words, There is no other God but God, they deny the eneffable Mystery of the most blessed Trinity. Then they proceed to several Blasphemies. They say other Prayers, at which they scarce move their lips; when they do this they stand three and three upon a Mat, lifting up their Eyes to Heaven three Times, and bowing down their Heads to the Ground. The Dutch Author, who gives this Account, does not mention any other Religion in this Island, nor in any of the others their Fleets touch’d at; tho’ it is so well known, that the Catholick Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ has been preach’d many Years before, throughout them all, with the Glory of Martyrdom; but those People conceal it, to what Intent is well known.

The Banaeses assemble in the Streets, and publick Places, where they feast Feasting in Banda. themselves. It is frequent among them to eat in the Temples and Woods, an hundred in a Parcel; especially when they consult together about the publick Weal, or any Danger. There are seven Cities in the Island, which are Enemies to one another. Nera is averse to the Lambethans, Combers and Veierans, and maintains Friendship with the Inhabitants of Lontoor, which is on the other Side of the Island, and those of two other little Cities call’d Poleruija and Poelvay. When they are to fight, they always repair Enmity among their Cities. first to Nera, to concert Affairs. Banda provides their Entertainments on the Ground, in the Streets. The Dishes are made of the Trunks and Leaves of Bananas, and other Plants.

Every one has a Piece of Sagu brought him on them, and a Plate of Rice boil’d in the Broth of Flesh. This they devour, carrying it to their Mouths with both Hands, and eat it with such a Relish, as if they had Jove’s Brains dress’d set before them; so the Dutch Relation of Paludanus and Hugo expresses it. Whilst the Meat lasts, till the Multitude are satisfy’d, the Nobles by two and two, take up their Cymiters and Shields, and fight to the sound of Bells, and the Clattering of their Basons. When weary of this Exercise, they deliver the Weapons to others, which continue it. The Cause of their Wars, [162]is for that the Inhabitants of Labetaca, many Years since, set some Plants in the Territory of Nera. The People of this City affronted at this Presumption, made the first War upon them; which is as bloodily prosecuted as if their Religion, or Honour, depended on it. They attack one another by Day and Night in their Territories, and by Sea in their Carcoas.

Banda Tar.

In these they do not, like us, fill up the Seams of the Boards with Pitch and Tar, but with Shells of Indian Nuts, which they call Clappos. They pound those Shells and Rhinds, till they became like a Bitumen, or Mass, wherein there remain certain Threads, which resemble Hemp, with this they knit their Seams, and fill up the Crannyes and cover them in such Sort that it resists the Force of the Water. They carry two, and sometimes four Pieces of Cannon. The Men use small Fire-locks, Bucklers, and Their Weapons. large Cymiters, which they call Padang, and Lances of a more solid Wood than our Box. They exercise all these Weapons from their Child-hood, as they do in casting a sort of Hooks with sharp Points and Edges, which they dart at the Enemies Bodies, and then draw back the Lines they are made fast to.

Their Heads they arm with Helmets; and on their Crests wear Birds of Paradise, both for Ornament, and a superstitious Defence. They have Breast and Back Pieces, and call’d them as we did Corselets. When they are to fight at Sea, as soon as the War-like Instruments begin to sound, the Soldiers fall a leaping, and skipping on the Benches, which run round the Oars like Shovels. Carcoas from Stem to Stern.

The Slaves ply the Oars, which are like wooden Shovels, make the Vessel fly by main Force, and serve to lade out the Water, when there is Occasion. They are so revengeful, that having Cruelty of Bandeses. been in those Days vanquish’d on Land by the Labetans, many of them being kill’d and wounded, those of Nera assembled the next Day in five Carcoas, and attacking the little Island Bayjer, the Natives whereof had assisted the Labetans they slew all they found, without sparing any but a few Women, whom they carry’d Captives to Nera, with the Heads of their Enemies before them on Spears; and for four Days, to the Amazement of Foreigners, and particularly the Dutch, they show’d their Cymiters embrew’d in Gore, about the Streets. Nay, a Soldier among them, in the Sight of Abundance, took a Fancy to try his Cymiter, he carry’d naked, and with it clove down one of the Captive Women, from the Shoulder to the Breast.

Burial of Enemies. 

They shew’d themselves Merciful in burying those Heads, assembling together in the House of the Shabander, that is the Governor, in the Presence of all the People, which uses to meet to see such Spectacles, every Heads.Soldier, as a Testimony of his Valour, laid all the Heads he had cut off on Their Funerals. a very large Stone, under a Tree: They wrapp’d them up in Cotton Cloths, and carrying them in Dishes bury’d them in a Grove, with much Smoke of Frankincense, whereof they have great Plenty.

Had those dead Persons been Natives, their Kindred and Friends would have come immediately to lament with loud Cries, as they use to do, over their Graves, which they dig like us, wrap up the Bodies in Shrouds of white Cotton, and carry them to be bury’d on their Shoulders. They are great Observers, that the Funerals of Men should go before those of Women; place Lamps over the Graves of all, and by their Light pray for them. 

They cry out furiously, calling the Dead, as if they hop’d they should come to Life at their Call; and perceiving they do not rise again, the Kindred and Friends meet about [163]the most splendid Entertainment they are able to provide. Being ask’d by the Dutch, what it was they ask’d of God in the Prayers they mutter’d over the Graves, they answer’d. We pray that the Dead may not rise again. So that the Want of the true Light of Faith, does not hinder them from seeing, how much Mankind suffers from the first Moment of his Life, till the last; but it is rather to be concluded, that they look upon it as a Misfortune to have been born. They were much amaz’d to hear, that the Dutch did not use the same Ceremony towards their dead.

They play at Foot-Ball, which is made of Spanish Reeds. They that Foot-Ball. Play make a Ring one standing in the Center, who tosses the Ball to those about him, and they with a Kick throw it so high that it is almost out of Sight. If any one misses it, they hiss, and hoot, to shame him for his Unskilfulness. Men live in this Island longer than in any other Parts of Life long in Banda. the World. The Dutch saw several, who exceed 130 Years of Age. They live upon the Product of their Country; and tho’ there is continual War, yet the greater Number lives Idle; and it is very remarkable that those People, who are so much addicted to Sloath, should be such Enemies to Quietness. 

A useless Life does not deserve much Age; and that which is dedicated to Idleness seldom attains to it. The Women Plow and Till Women Till the Land. the Land, and follow other manly Professions. They seldom go abroad with Men; they have all the Charge of Houshold Affairs, and their greatest Employment within Doors, is usually uncasing and drying of Nutmegs.

The Dutch having loaded with Spice, Purcelane, and some Rubies, and Dutch depart from Banda. settled Factories, and Amity, sail’d from Banda, on the 14th of July, with great firing of Cannon. They stood towards the Island Noeselau, the Natives whereof are Anthropophagi, so the Greeks call Man-Eaters. They proceeded towards that of Amboyna, whose Western Point they discover’d, yet did not touch at it then, but went on to the greater Java, notwithstanding Come to Java. their Admiral was at Amboyna. They arriv’d at Java and the City Tuban, sent two Boats thither to Discover, and know whither they might be allow’d to take in Provisions. Those who return’d with the Answer, brought along with them a Portuguese, who, at the Perswasion of the Natives, had renounc’d Portuguese Renegado. the Faith of Jesus Christ, as was known, and call’d among them by the name of the Renegado, as a proper Appellative, and not dishonourable. 

This Man inform’d the Admiral, That if he would stay there three or four Months, he might enrich his Ships to his Hearts Content. They sent by him to ask the King’s Leave, with some Presents of Copper, Glass and Silk. Presents to and from the King. The next day Merchants came down to the Harbour, with Abundance of Commodities; and from the King, in Return for their insignificant Present, they brought the Dutch 19 great Sacks of Rice. The Trade being settled, they went up to the City, where they saw several Horsemen, well Arm’d, Horses well Accouter’d, on which they value themselves very much, Shops well stor’d, and a free Trade for all Nations.

The Vice-Admiral went to kiss the King’s Hand, who receiv’d him Graciously; promis’d to go Aboard the Ships in Person, and perform’d it, having first order’d them to be show’d all his Royal Apartments, even to his Womens private Lodgings; his Elephants; an infinite number of Birds in Cages, and his Stables full of excellent Horses, and many of them. Then the Prince came Aboare the Ships, and after him the King. The Cannon saluted them both, and they admir’d, and were pleas’d with the Noise. [164]

Tuban Capital of Java. Tuban is the King of Java’s Court, the strongest of all the Cities in that Island, encompass’d with a high Wall, divided by several Gates with Towers on them, contains stately Structures, and Squares appointed for the publick Resort of Traders, the King is extraordinary rich, and in a few Hours can gather a great Number of Horse and Foot. 

His Palace is truly Royal, his Family consists of the Prime Nobility, and he is very powerful at Sea. They call their Ships Juncks; which being loaded with Pepper, and other Product of the Country, as Silks and Cloths, the Manufactures Trade of that City. of his People, are sent to Balim; where bartering them for Cloaths, they transport those to other Kingdoms, as those of Banda, the Moluccos, and Philippines. Whence, and from other Islands, having improv’d their Commodities, they bring Mastick, Nutmegs, Cloves, and other Spice. All the Habit. Country abounds in Cattle, which graze all Day in the Woods, and are hous’d at Night.

Their Habit is the same as at Banda, and covers their Bodies from the Waste downwards, the rest upwards remaining naked. They all wear Daggers, call’d Crises, and the Nobles stately long Vests, the Fullness whereof waves in the Air magnificently. None of them goes abroad attended by less than ten or twelve Servants, one of which always carries for his Master a little Basket full of the Leaves of a certain Plant they call Betele, which they chew with green Nuts, and a little Lime. This Composition they call Ledon; in chewing, it yields a Juice, which they swallow, and then spit out the green Substance, after the Virtue has been extracted in their Mouths.

They were so overjoy’d at the coming of the Dutch, that the next Day The Kings Dress. they invited them to see their Diversions. The King was present a Horse-Back, clad in several Sorts of rich Silks, but all Girt about him. To his Belt hung a Cymiter, in a Scabard adorn’d with precious Stones; the Hilt of beaten Gold, with a Devils Head form’d on it. 

On his Turbant he had abundance of Feathers. All the Nobility follow’d him, Dress’d much after the same manner, mounted on stately prancing Horses, but smaller than ours, with rich Furnitures of Spanish Leather, studded, and plated with Gold, and Figures of Serpents; and in some of the Bridles they had Stones, so white that they look’d like Alabaster. Sometimes they ran streight forwards, and sometimes in a Ring, casting their Darts. When the Sport was over, they attended the King, by whose Orders they carry’d aboard the Ships, Commerce settled between the Dutch and Javaneses. and to the Dutch Men’s Lodgings, a great quantity of Rice, Sheep, Goats, Hens, Eggs, Fish, and Fruit, as Coco-Nuts, Mangos, Lemons, and delicious Bananas. 

Then they fell to treating of Trade, and Amity, and thought every Thing cheap except the Pepper, for they not liking the Commodities the Dutch offer’d in Exchange for it, lifting up their Hands cry’d, Lima, which, in their Tongue, signifies five Pieces of Eight. So much they demanded for a Measure of theirs. They were well receiv’d in all Respects, except in Relation to admitting of their Sect.

They had deliver’d Letters to the King from Count Maurice, which he answer’d in the Persian Tongue, and the Dutch having receiv’d them, left Tuban, on the 24th of the same Month, with fair Weather, and well furnish’d with valuable Commodities and Provisions. Passing by the Island Madura Island. Sidago, they anchor’d between Java and Madura; sounded the Depth, and notwithstanding the Current, and that the Ground was a stiff Muddy Hill, [165]they visited Madura, landing on the East-side; but remov’d presently to the City Arosbay, on the West, and afterwards thence to Jorta, to get Guides, or Pilots to conduct them to the rest of the Moluccos. They sent to Compliment the King of Madura, who presently after the Audience, sent the Vice-Admiral a Sheep, with which went the Renegado, who had brought him a Dagger, they call Criz, from the King of Tuban, richly adorn’d with Gold and precious Stones, and the King’s Head engrav’d on the Pommel. 

They found a German settled in the Country, rich in Spice, and understood Madura Described. by him, that at Arosbay they had seiz’d 40 of their Companions. The Island of Madura, next to Java, inclines to the Northward. They wear the same Habit as in the other; but are sharper Witted. It is most fruitful in Rice, but both in Reaping and Plowing, the Peasants and Buffalos are mir’d up to the Knees, the continual Inundations keeping the Ground so wet. Few Ships come to it, by reason of its inaccessible Shoales. They have the same common use of Weapons, Elephants, Horses, Spears, Campilanes, or Cymiters, and Shields. The Crizes, or Daggers, worn by the King’s Guards are Arosbay City. of Silver.

