---
heading: Book 9
linkTitle: Book 9
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


Preparations in Spain against the Moluccos.

The continual Application of the President and Council to expedite the Enterprize, seem’d to be a Presage of the late ill Success at the Molucco Islands. The true Account of it was brought in Don Pedro de Acunna’s Letters. The King and his Ministers were concern’d at it; but at the same Time, it was a Motive to hasten the Preparations, recover the lost Reputation, and put an End at once to that Strife. Some attributed the Miscarriage to Disagreement between Gallinato and Furtado; others suspected the Discord had been between the Spanish and Portuguese Nations. None urg’d that it might be for Want of Necessaries for carrying on the Work. These Debates ended, and the President espousing the Business with the Resolution that was requisite, represented the Matter in a lively Manner to the King, recounting what the General Furtado had done, the Succours sent by Don Pedro de Acunna under Gallinato, and how, tho’ the Officers and Soldiers The Presidents Remonstrance to the King. did their Duty, the Success fail’d. That it was look’d upon as most certain, That the Molucco Kings, who still continu’d under Subjection, had acted coldly. That this Failure in them was occasion’d by a Sort of State Policy, easy to be seen thro’; which was the Protracting of the War, and making use of our Arms for their private Advantage, without desiring it should be fully concluded. That if Means were not us’d for expelling the Dutch out of Ternate, they would become absolute Masters of the Archipelago of the Conception, and deprive his Majesty of all the Revenue [209]of the Spice, as they had almost done in the most considerable Parts of India.

The King’s Answer. The King having consider’d it, approv’d of what was laid before him; and being sensible of its mighty Importance, judg’d the Number of Ships, Men and Arms demanded, too small; and therefore added more with his own Royal Hand, without fixing a certain Proportion; and order’d, that no Time should be lost, seeming very earnest to have his Decree put in Execution. In the same Manner he directed, thro’ the Intervention of the Duke of Lerma, that the Design in Hand should be carry’d on. Hereupon the Council pass’d the Necessary Orders, and the President sent Letters and Instructions to the Viceroy of New Spain, and the Governour of the Philippine Islands, that they might with the same Diligence fulfil the Commands they should receive as to this Point. The King in his Order sent to this Effect, declar’d his Will, and the Method he was pleas’d should be observ’d as follows.

Don Pedro de Acunna, my Governour, and Captain General of the Philippine The King’s Letter to Don Pedro de Acunna. Islands and President of my Royal Court in them. On the 20th of September of the last Year 1603, I writ to you by an Advice Boat, which carry’d Gaspar Gomez, of the Society of JESUS, to New Spain, acquainting you with the Resolution I had taken concerning what you writ to me from New Spain, when you went to serve me those Posts, relating to the Expedition of Ternate. Pursuant to it, I have order’d 500 Men to be rais’d in these Kingdoms, who shall be sent aboard the Fleet that is to go this Year to New Spain. I writ to the Viceroy, directing him to raise 500 more, that so you may have at least 800 sent you for this Enterprize. I have appointed four Captains to carry them from this Kingdom; one of whom is the Vice-Admiral John de Esquivel, to be Commander in Chief of the said Men; besides six in half Pay, who are skillful and experienc’d Soldiers, that in Case any of the said Captains dye by the Way, they may supply their Places; and that they may take Charge of the Companies to be rais’d in New Spain, as I write to the Viceroy. I have appointed the said Captains 40 Captains and their Pay. Ducats a Month Pay, and the Vice-Admiral John de Esquivel 60. Those in half Pay are to have 25 Ducats; and from that Time forward, the said John de Esquivel, in Case I order him to have the Title of Collonel, shall have 120 Ducats a Month; and whilst he serves under the Title of Commander in Chief of the said Men, to have 90 Ducats a Month; the Captain: 60, and those in half Pay 40. The Soldiers, as well those rais’d in Spain, Soldiers Pay. as those from New Spain, shall have Eight Ducats a Month; the Viceroy being order’d to send to those Islands as much Money as is requisite for a Years Pay, according to those Rates. And, if they shall be longer detain’d upon other Occasions of my Service, he shall also furnish what is Necessary, upon Advice from you. Concerning which I have thought fit to acquaint, charge and command you, that in Case this Pay of the Soldiers can be moderated, The Viceroy to furnish Money, Powder and Cannon. with Regard to what is usually paid there to Men of this Sort, you accordingly reform it, as may be justifiable, acquainting me, and the Viceroy of New Spain with it. However you shall make no Alteration in the Pay of the Vice-Admiral John de Esquivel, nor of the Captains, Ensigns, and those in half Pay. I have also directed the Viceroy to furnish you with whatsoever shall be requisite, as far as 120000 Ducats you have demanded [210]for this Expedition, six Pieces of Battering Cannon, and 500 Quintals, or hundred Weight of Musket Powder. The Men from hence go arm’d with Muskets and Firelocks. You must be very careful that there be due Order, Rule and Method in the Distribution of the said Money, and every Thing besides. You shall endeavour to perform what is intended, as I expect you Don Pedro to go in Person. will, with the Men sent from hence and from New Spain, and those you may have rais’d in those Islands for the Expedition against Ternate. If it be possible you shall go in Person, as you have offer’d to do, leaving those Islands in the best Order that may be. And in case the Affairs there should be in such a Posture, that you cannot go in Person upon this Expedition, you shall appoint another of sufficient Experience, and well quallify’d, to take the whole Command, for I impower you so to do. And it is my Will, That in Case you should miscarry, either going upon the Expedition, or thro’ any other Accident, or the Person you shall appoint for it, that then the John de Esquivel to succeed Don Pedro. Vice-Admiral John de Esquivel succeed and prosecute it; and that all such as go upon the said Expedition, as well as Seamen and Landmen, obey him, as they would you, if there. And I declare that in this Case, and if you should miscarry, and the said John de Esquivel succeed in the Command of the Expedition, he shall be subject and subordinate to my Royal Sovereign Court of those Islands. I have made Choice of the Captains, who have the Command of the Foot rais’d in those Kingdoms, as Persons of Merit and Service; and therefore do command you to honour and favour them as far as may be allowable, and in so doing you will please me; and that you do not reform them, nor take away their Companies, to give them to others, unless it be to advance them to higher Posts. Nevertheless, if they shall be guilty of any Crimes, you may punish them, as their Superior Officer. It is to be suppos’d, That when these Men come to those Islands, and they shall set out in the first Ships that sail from New Spain, after the Arrival of the Flota, you will have all Things in such Forwardness, that the Enterprize may be Charge of Martial Discipline, &c. gone upon immediately. I charge you strictly to undertake it with all the Precaution, Maturity, and Consideration I can expect from so able a Soldier; and that the Men be well disciplin’d and exercis’d, and all Things so well dispos’d, that you may meet with the wish’d Success, which is of such Consequence, and you are sensible how much is hazarded, and of the great Expence that is made. You are to take Care, as I charge you, that the necessary Order be taken in the Distribution and Management of my Treasure; and that all superfluous Charges be avoided. You shall from Time to Time give me an Account of whatsoever happens, as Occasion shall offer. When you have recover’d the Fort of Ternate, you shall take the necessary Measures for the Security of the same, and of the Island. I have order’d the Viceroy of New Spain to send you Advice, as soon as the Men that go from hence arrive there, if there be conveniency so to do; and that he particularly inform you of what Force he has gather’d there, and will be effective any other Way; as also when they shall sail thence, that you may dispose Things there accordingly; and if you shall think fit that the Men be left any where, before they come to Manila, you may order it, or do as you shall think most Expedient in all Respects. Valladolid, June the 20th 1604. [211]

After the Dispatching of this Order, or Letter, the Contents of it began to be executed in Spain. In the foregoing Year 1603, whilst Don Pedro Dreadful Fire at Manila. de Acunna was busy in making Preparations to this Effect, an Accident happen’d in the Philippine Islands, which threatned the Ruin of them, and greater Calamaties. A Fire broke out at Manila in April, which consum’d the best Part, and above half the City, without being able to save the Goods, which had been landed from the Ships newly arriv’d from New Spain, and laid up in the safest Part of the Houses, whereof 270 of Timber and Stone were burnt, as also the Monastery of S. Dominick, House and Church, the Royal Hospital of the Spaniards, and the Magazines, no Building that lay betwixt them escaping. Fourteen Spaniards were burnt, and among them, the licenciate Sanz, a Canon of the Cathedral, with some Indians and Blacks. The Loss was valu’d at a Million. It seem’d to be an Omen of what was to follow, which agreed with the Signs seen in the Sky.

In the foregoing March, a Chinese Ship came into the Bay of Manila, Three Chinese Mandarines at Manila. in which, as the Out-Guards gave the Account, there came three great Mandarines, with suitable Pomp and Retinue, about their Monarch’s Business. The Governour gave them leave to land, and come into the City. As soon as landed, they were carry’d directly to the King’s House, in Palankines of Ivory, and curious Sorts of Wood gilt, on the Shoulders of their Servants, who were clad in Red. There the Governour expected them, with the Members of the Royal Court, and a great Number of Officers and Soldiers, who also lin’d the Streets, and publick Places. When they came to the House, they were set down by their Servants, and leaving their Colours, Umbrelloes, Launces, and other Tokens of Grandeur, went into a spacious Room magnificently adorn’d. As soon as they saw the Governour, who expected them standing, the Mandarines, making their Obeysance, and performing Ceremonies of Civility after the Chinese Fashion, made up to him. Don Pedro return’d their Courtesy after the Manner of Spain. They, pursuant to their Commission, with the Interposition Their Extraordinary Message. of Interpreters, told him; “That their King had sent them with a Chinese, they brought along with them in Chains, that they might with their own Eyes see a Golden Island, call’d Cabit, near Manila, of which that Subject of his had given him an Account, telling him, it was not possess’d by any Body, and therefore ask’d of him a Number of Ships, to seize it, promising to bring them back loaden with Gold, and if he did not he should take his Head. That they were come to fulfill that Promise to their King, and to satisfy him of the Truth of the Existence of so strange an Island; which being an Affair of such Consequence, their King would not commit it to any Persons of less Note than themselves.” Don Pedro de Acunna answer’d them in a few Don Pedro’s Answer. Words. “That they were Welcome; that they might rest them in the House prepar’d for their Entertainment in the City, and they would afterwards discourse about that Affair more at Leisure. Thus they took their Leave, and at the Door got up again into their Palankines, on the Shoulders of their Slaves, who carry’d them to their Lodgings. There the Governour order’d them to be plentifully furnish’d with Provisions, and all Dainties as long as they staid. [212]

It is a plain Case, that the coming of these Mandarines must raise a Jealousy, Jealousy of the Chineses. and make it be concluded, that they came upon another Design, than what they declar’d. The Chineses are sharp and mistrustful, and it was not to be believ’d, that their King should send them on that Errand, nor the Fiction likely to be credited by the Spaniards. At the same Time, eight Chinese Ships arriv’d at Manila with Merchandize, and declar’d, That the Mandarines come as Spies, because the King of China intended to break off all Trade with the Spaniards, and send over a mighty Fleet of Ships that could carry an hundred Thousand fighting Men, to possess himself of that Place, and that this Expedition would be some time that Year. The Governour redoubled his Care for the Security of the City, and order’d the Mandarines to be well treated, but not to be suffer’d to go out of the City, nor to administer Justice among the Sangleys, or Chineses, as they had began to do, which they seem’d to resent. Then he sent them Word, that they must dispatch their Business, and return speedily to China. All this was done, without any Signs of Jealousy shown by the Spaniards, or that they saw into their private Designs.

The Mandarines visited the Governour again, and then he was more Second Visit of the Mandarines, and the Governour’s Answers. plain; and making something of a Jest of their Coming, said to them, That he wonder’d their King should give Credit to the Chinese they brought Prisoner; or if it had been true that any such Gold were in the Philippine Islands, that he should think the Spaniards would suffer it to be carry’d away, the Country belonging, as it did, to the King of Spain. The Mandarines answer’d they believ’d as much; but that their King had sent them, and they were oblig’d to come, and to carry him an Answer. That having done their Part, according to their Duty, they would return. The Governour being willing to make short Work of it, sent the Mandarines, with their Prisoner and Servants to the Port of Cabite, which is two Leagues from the City. There they were receiv’d with the Noise of our Cannon, purposely fir’d at their Landing, which they admir’d, and did not conceal their Surprise and Fear. When landed they ask’d the Prisoner, The Chinese Prisoner prov’d a Cheat. whether that was the Island he had told the King of: He, nothing daunted, answer’d, It was. They reply’d, Then where is the Gold? All that is in it, rejoyn’d he, is Gold, and I will make it good. The same Answer he made to several other Questions put to him; and all was writ down in the Presence of some Spanish Commanders, and trusty Naguatatoes, or Interpreters. To conclude, the Mandarines order’d a Basket made of Palm-Tree Leaves to be fill’d with that Earth, to carry it to the King of China; and after dining and resting, return’d to Manila. The Naguatatoes or Interpreters, declar’d, That the Mandarines pressing the Prisoner to answer directly to the Purpose, he told them, That the meaning of what he said to the King was, that there was abundance of Gold, and other Wealth in the He explains himself. Possession of the Spaniards and Natives of the Philippine Islands; and if he would furnish him with a Fleet well mann’d, he having been at Luzon, and knowing the Country, would undertake to make himself Master of it, and return to China with the Ships laden with Gold. This, with what the Chineses had said before, seem’d more likely than the Invention of the Mandarines. [213]

Don F. Michael de Benavides, then Archbishop Elect of Manila, who understood the Chinese Language, was of this Opinion. He had been in their Country, was acquainted with the Subtilties of the Sangleyes, and suffer’d their Torments and Cruelties. It was presently Judg’d, that the Mandarines came under that Colour to view the Country, and to lay the Foundation of their Insurrection and Mutiny there. These certain Judgments are grounded on the Irrational Disposition of the Sangleyes, or Chineses, which, not to mention other Proofs, will sufficiently appear, by some few Part of a Letter concerning the Chineses.Periods of the Long Letter Ferdinand de los Rios, of whom we have spoken before, writ to Manila, from the Port of Pinar in Canton, where he was upon the Service of the Church, and of his King. For these Infidels, says he, have the Light of Nature more clouded than any other People in the World, and therefore there is need of Angels, and not Men, to deal with them. For the better conceiving what a sort of Country ’tis we are in, I shall only say, that this is the true Kingdom of the Devil, and where he may be said to govern with absolute Power. Every Sangley, or Chinese, seems to be possess’d by him; for there is no piece of Malice, or Fraud, but what they attempt. The Government, tho’ outwardly it appears good, as to Order and Method, for its Security; yet when you once have Experience of its Practice, you will find it is all a Contrivance of the Devil. Tho’ they do not here publickly rob, or plunder Strangers, they do it another worse Way, &c.

Chineses design the Conquest of the Philippines. This Jealousy conceiv’d against the Sangleyes, who, once for all, are the Chineses so call’d by the Spaniards at Manila, was verify’d; for it was afterwards known, that the Captain of the King of China’s Guards had begg’d of him the Conquest of the Philippine Islands, at the Perswasion of that Chinese they brought Prisoner. The Governour treated the Mandarines civilly, and mistrusted their Designs, keeping a watchfull Eye over them. However there wanted not some-body that ask’d them, what they thought of that Fellow’s Invention, since they had seen that the Place he mention’d was so far from having any Gold, that there were not the least Tokens of any such Thing to be found in it; and since it was so, they ought to make him give it under his Hand, that he had told his King a Lye. One of the Mandarines bid him do so, and he taking the Pen form’d The Prisoners Declaration. three Characters, which, explain’d in our Tongue, signify’d, If the King pleases, it is Gold; and if not, it is Sand. Being press’d farther, he declared, That he had inform’d his King that Gold was produc’d there to incline his Majesty to entrust him with a good Fleet, wherewith he might take Revenge of the Christian Sangleyes, who had done him many Wrongs. Little Notice was taken of all this, and tho’ the Authority of the Mandarines seem’d to corroborate it, all was look’d upon as Folly, for none believ’d that they design’d to carry on a War out of their Country. The Mandarines return’d Home, having, as is believ’d, communicated their Project to the Sangleyes that were settled there, who at Manila, and in the other Islands, were above 30000.

Chineses take Aynan by Treachery. The same was practis’d by the Chinese King in the Island of Aynao, or Aynan, a most fruitful Country, and near to his Kingdom, where the Chineses crept in under Colour of Trade, as they did at Manila, and possess’d themselves of it to this Day. This Island has such a plentiful Pearl Fishery, that in the Year 1600 the King caus’d 1500 Arrobas, that is, 375 Hundred [214]Weight of them to be taken up. This will not seem incredible to such as know, that not long before, in four Months Time, he gather’d 1700 Monstrous Quantity of Pearls. Vessels that row’d, for this Fishery, every one being oblig’d to take a Pico, that is, five Arrobas, or Quarters of an Hundred, to gather a sufficient Quantity of Pearls to rebuil’d a Royal Apartment that had been pull’d down in that King’s Palace. He built it again, covering the Walls and Roofs with Clusters of Pearls, and Birds, Beasts, Fruits, and Flowers, all made of that precious Substance, set on Plates of Gold. The Truth of this Fact appears by an Authentick Writing, which gives an Account of it; for being likely to be judg’d Fabulous, it was requisite to authorize the Relation.

Precautions taken at Manila. The Governour did not altogether look upon the Design of the Mandarines as a Piece of Vanity and Folly, tho’ he conceal’d his Thoughts; for he made some Preparations, and among the rest hasten’d the repairing of the Walls of the City; which having suffer’d much by the Fire, when the Arms were also lost, he made up that Defect the best he could, and the Sangleyes were assisting in it. It is to be observ’d, that those People have a separate Government among themselves, in the Philippine Islands.

At the Time that Don Pedro, the Governour, was most intent upon the War against the Molucco Islands, there happen’d such an Accident at Manila, as Encan a Chinese of great Subtilty. might not only have diverted it, but utterly destroy’d the whole Province. A Man was then living, who stay’d at Manila, when the great Pyrate Limaon, of whose Life and Actions there are Printed Relations, came to Manila. He was then an Idolater, and, as was reported, serv’d the Pyrate in a leud Capacity. His Name was Encan, born at Semygua, in the Province of Chincheo; and was baptiz’d under the Government of Santiago de Vera, who gave him his Surname, and he was call’d Baptist de Vera. He prov’d a subtile Dealer, and successfully Active, by which Means, following Trade, he gather’d immense Wealth, and was Great with the Governours of the Philippines. Through his Interposition, the Sangleyes propos’d to Don Pedro, that he should allow them to repair a Parapet of the Wall, which was finishing, at their own Expence; for that they, as a Part of the Publick, would do his Majesty that Piece of Service; and every one of them offer’d four Royals, that is, two Shillings, towards the Work. This Piece of Service, and the Favour of the Citizens, Encan had purchas’d by good Turns, made the Suspicion conceiv’d of their Conspiracy vanish, or at least be little regarded.

His crafty Practices. He was respected by the Spaniards, and belov’d by the Sangleyes, had been their Governour several Times, and had many Godsons, and other Dependants. At this Time he cunningly kept within the City, to secure Things by his Presence; but from thence he stirr’d up the People, and laid his Design, by Means of his Confidents. He thought fit to know what Number of People he should find to put it in Execution, and that he might muster them in private, order’d that every one of his Country-Men should bring him a Needle; pretending he had Occasion for them for some Work. The Sangleyes, either guessing at the End for which these Needles were gather’d, or else ignorantly obey’d Encan. The Needles being put into a little Box, the Number of them was so great, that it encourag’d him to undertake a far different Work than he had propos’d.

The Governour still forwarded the Work of the Walls; rais’d Men; and directed the Justices to furnish themselves with Provisions, and Arms, [215]to relieve the City. Near the Parian, which is the Quarters of the Chineses, Don Pedro strengthens himself. there was another Ward, inhabited by Japoneses, who are Enemies to the Sangleyes, with whom they are continually at War in their own Country. The Governour summon’d the Heads of them, and artfully div’d into their Inclinations, to discover, what Use he might make of them upon Occasion, and whether they would assist him against the Chineses, in Case Japoneses promise to assist the Spaniards, and alarm the Chineses. they came to a War. The Japoneses, proud of the Confidence he repos’d in them, and of an Opportunity of serving against their Enemy, answer’d, they were ready to dye with the Spaniards. This discreet Precaution occasion’d some Harm, for the Japoneses revealing the Secret, or adding some Circumstances in the Relation, it was given out, that Don Pedro, with their Assistance, intended to cut off the Sangleyes; and some of the Japoneses told them as much, that they might fly, and reward them for the Intelligence. Many of them had Thoughts of absconding in the Mountains, the Rest were frighted, and those who intended to revolt, found an Opportunity to perswade the others to joyn with them, and encourag’d the unsettled with fair Promises. In short, most of them consented to the Rebellion, and appointed S. Francis’s Day, when the Christians were all at Church, Conspiracy of the Chineses. celebrating that Festival, for the Time of rising. Others were for having it done at Night, when 25000 of them were to break in and murder our Men.

Notwithstanding their Secrecy some Discovery was made. John de Talavera, Discovery of it. Curate of the Village of Quiapo, inform’d the Arch-Bishop, that an Indian Woman, with whom a Sangley, or Chinese, was in Love, had discover’d to him the Plot laid for S. Francis’s Day. It was also reported, that a Woman-Black had said, there would be a great Slaughter, and another Conflagration, like the former, on S. Francis’s Night. These and other Advices were presently made known to the Governour and Council. A sufficient Proof was to see the Chineses sell all, to their very Shoes, and compound their Debts, tho’ this was rather lookt upon as a Design to The Governour’s Precautions. be gone, than to commit any Treason. To dispell their Fear of the Spaniards and Japoneses, the Governour made them some Speeches himself, and caus’d the same to be proclaim’d in all Parts, ingaging the King’s Faith and Security; but nothing was of Force to quiet them. Three Days before the Feast of S. Francis, above 400 Anhayes Merchants stay’d in the City, because they could not dispose of their Goods. These seeing the others in Disorder, on Account of the Report, that the Spaniards and Japoneses design’d to massacre them, sent a Message to the Governour, by Chican, Anhayes in Fear, assur’d. one of the Province of Anhay, or Chincheo, whereof that City is Head. He came to him by Night, for Fear of the other Chineses; and acquainted him with the Dread, and Confusion they were in, without knowing what Course to take, and therefore they came to him for Advice and Protection. He having hear’d him, gave all possible Security in his Answer, and the next Day went himself to talk to his Companions, whom he satisfy’d in a very obliging Manner, assuring them, that the Spanish Nation never was guilty of executing, or consenting to such Villanies. This Discourse satisfy’d them; but still those who had Mischief in their Hearts did not desist.

The Sangleyes, or Chineses live there in a separate Quarter, which the Arabs call Alcayceria, and the People of the Philippines, Parian. On S. [216]Francis’s Eve, a great Number of them met in a House half a League from Parian the Chinese Quarter. the City, where there is a Sugar Work: The House stands in a Thicket, which belongs to the Sangley Governour. Those who began first to gather there, were the Gardiners of the Quarter of Parian. Don Lewis Perez First meeting of the mutinous Chineses. de las Marinhas had Advice of it, from the Dominicans of Minondo. Don Lewis had Charge of the Christian Sangleyes, and sent Word to Don Pedro de Acunna. Minondo is a Town inhabited by Chineses opposite to Manila, the River only parting them. From Minondo the Chinese Dwellings run on, as far as another Town of the Natives, call’d Tondo; and in the Minondo a Town of Chineses. Quarter of the Chineses, there is a strong Monastery of Augustinians, all of Stone. Not far from it the Dominicans have two, but wooden Buildings. The Governour, to be fully inform’d of the whole Truth, sent thither Baptist Tondo a Town of Natives. before mention’d, Governour of the Sangleyes, of whom he had a great Opinion, and all Men lookt upon him as a sincere Christian, and loyal Subject to the King. He charg’d him to speak to them in his Name, and to convince Baptist, the Chinese Governour sent to appease them. them how little Cause they had to fear, as knowing how peaceable the Spaniards were. Baptist undertook this Commission, went to the Sugar Work, which was his own, spoke to his People as he thought fit, and return’d very late with the Answer, telling Don Pedro, that he had been in Danger of being chosen their Chief, and that his People would have forc’d him to accept of it. That it was true, they were assembled together, and strong, but that it was all occasion’d by the Fear they had conceiv’d of the Spaniards; and that they had display’d several Colours with Chinese Characters on them, which, being translated, contain’d these Words.

Inscription on the Chinese Rebels Colours. ’The Chief and General of the Kingdom of China, call’d Ezequi, and another of the Tribe of Su, call’d Tym, following the Dictates of Heaven in this Affair, that all the Chineses may unanimously joyn in this Work, and obey them, in Order to root out these Enemy Robbers, are willing that Yochume and Quinte, Japoneses, in Conjunction with us Sangleyes, do conquer this City, and when we have subdu’d it, we will divide this Country, even to the Grass of it, equally between us, as becomes loving Brothers.

Falshood of Baptist. He pretended to be mightily concern’d, because they would have proclaim’d him King, and he was forc’d to make his Escape to save his Loyalty; and had deceiv’d them, promising to return. Hereupon the Governour us’d several Means to appease them, the Danger of so furious a Beginning increasing with the Number of the Rebells. The first Mischief he endeavour’d to prevent was the destroying of the Rice, which was then almost ripe. He appointed Colonel Augustin de Arceo, Major Christopher de Azcueta, and Captain Gallinato to go speak to them; but Don Lewis Perez de la Marinhas, who liv’d at Minondo thinking the Rebellion now requir’d some harsher Remedy, came at Night to advise the Governour to be more watchful, and that all the City should do the like. He desir’d he would allow him some Men to secure that Town, for he fear’d the Sangleyes would burn it that Night, and it was now requisite to make open War; and he must not believe they could be reduc’d by Messages, or fair Means. The Don Lewis Perez secures Minondo. Governour being impos’d upon by Baptist, still hop’d all would be compos’d without Effusion of Blood, and at the Perswasion of Don Lewis gave him 20 Soldiers, his own Servants, and some marry’d Spaniards, who were Inhabitants of the same Town. He distributed these Men into the most dangerous Posts of it, that the Enemy might not set Fire to it, and the Christian [217]Sangleyes when they lost their Goods, joyn’d the Rebels. On the other Hand, the Governour privately posted his Troops, and Sentinels; and all Men expected, or dreaded the Fate of that Night, particularly the General John de Alcega, who, by the Governor’s Command, was to follow the Orders he receiv’d from Don Lewis. Proclamation was again made, that all Men should be peaceable, under Penalty of being sent to the Galleys for four Years.

This avail’d so little, that, excepting 4000 Handicrafts Men, and the Anhayes 1000 Sangleyes salley. Merchants, all the Rest assembled at the Sugar Work. At one in the Morning, a Party of about 1000 Sangleyes march’d out of a Fort, with Catanas, or Cymiters, Halbards, and other Weapons advanc’d, as also with long Staves, harden’d at the Fire at the Points; which they use instead of Pikes, and are no less serviceable. These are very frequent among them in their Country, and are made of a solid Sort of Wood, call’d Mangle. They fell upon the Farm, or Pleasure House of Captain Stephen de Marquina, not far from their Parian, and murder’d him, his Wife, Children, Servants, They murder several and burn Houses. and Slaves. They set Fire to the House, and to those of other Spaniards, among which were those of Colonel Peter de Chaves, and of two Clergymen, who liv’d a retir’d Life, their Names Francis Gomez, and Ferdinand de los Rios. They also kill’d F. Barnard de Santa Catalina, Commissary of the Inquisition, of the Order of S. Dominick. All these defended themselves, as did many more who escap’d, desperately wounded. Thence they drew towards the Town of Tondo, which is divided into Quarters. They fell upon that of Quiapo, and set Fire to it, after murdering 20 Persons. More Cruelties. Among the Rest they burnt a Lady of Quality, and a Boy, giving great Shouts, and boasting that from thence forward, the Indians should pay Tribute to them, and the Castillas perish.

News being brought on Saturday Morning, that the Sangleyes were going to enter the Town, and that the Natives had withdrawn themselves in their Vessels toward Manila, in Order to get in, or lye under the Shelter of its Walls in the River, the Governour dispos’d the Regular Troops, and those of the City Militia about the Walls, viewing the Gates, and all weak Places. Captain Perez sent to Tondo. He sent Captain Gaspar Perez with his regular Company to Tondo, and order’d him to obey Don Lewis de las Marinhas, and to carry no Colours. As soon as he came, the 20 Men sent the Night before, joyn’d him, and Don Lewis thinking that too small a Force, sent to desire Succours. The Governour knowing he was in the right, sent the Captain Don Thomas Bravo, his own Nephew, 24 Years of Age, who serv’d at Ternate in the Captain Thomas Bravo Succours him. Expedition of Andrew Furtado. He went over to the Town of Tondo, with another Company of the regular Forces, some Voluntiers, and seven of the Governour’s Servants, leaving the Colours in the City. After him he sent Captain Peter de Arcea, an old Low-Country Soldier. Don Lewis sent Word again, that the Chineses were marching towards Tondo, that they were Numerous, and he fear’d they would burn the Town, and a stately Church of the Augustinians. The Governour sent him 60 Men more, most of them arm’d with Pikes, and Halbards, the first having been Musketiers. These were commanded by Don John de Penna, till he deliver’d them to Don Lewis. When this Company came, there had been an Ingagement at Tondo, wherein Don Lewis slew abundance of Sangleyes, and oblig’d the rest to retire; preventing their burning the Town, which began to take Fire, and the Houses at the Entrance of it were consum’d. Don Lewis would have pursu’d the Enemy, [218]who retir’d to their Fort, and Don Thomas Bravo endeavour’d to disswade Chineses repuls’d. him, saying, The Men were all fatigu’d, and that as soon as out of the Town they would meet with nothing but Bogs and Brambles; and since the Governor’s Orders extended no farther than to keep the Enemy off from thence, and save the burning of the Church and Houses, and that had been done, they ought to send him Advice of it, before they proceeded, being only the River parted them, and in the mean while the Soldiers would refresh themselves, and they might hear more of the Enemies Design. Captain Alcega said the same, but Don Lewis being bent upon it, and offended to be Don Lewis upbraids Captain Alcega. contradicted, ask’d him, What Hen had cackled in his Ear? And bid them follow him, for five and twenty Soldiers were enough to deal with all China. Alcega answer’d, He was us’d to hear as good Game-Cocks as himself Crow; yet he would do well to consider what he did. However, tho’ F. Farfan, an Augustinian, earnestly perswaded Don Lewis, falling on his Knees, to do as they desir’d him, and not to go any farther, yet he could not be prevail’d on; but having order’d the Captains, Gaspar Perez, and Peter de Arceo, to secure some Posts with a few Men, he broke out furiously, and Pursues the Enemy against Advice. began to march, being follow’d by the Men, in Pursuit of the Enemy; who had already gain’d the Road, and they overtook them near the Fort, between the Bogs and the Fordable Shoals. When they came to the Fort, the Country open’d a little more. Here they began to fall upon the Enemies Rear, and they perceiving how few the Spaniards were, as not being above 130, drew up in a Body with two Points, like a Half Moon, and lay in Ambush among the Grass. The main Body of our Men march’d towards the Fort, and then those who lay in Ambush rising, enclos’d our Men, and fell upon them so furiously with sharp Stakes, Cymiters, and other Weapons, that they cut them in Pieces. Head-Pieces of Proof were found batter’d with a Stake. A Musketier, who serv’d Don Lewis, reported, that a Company of Is slaughter’d with his Men. Sangleyes fell upon him, who having enclos’d him, laid about so implacably, that they bruiz’d and broke his Legs; after which he fought a considerable Time on his Knees, till they stun’d him with their Staves, against which a strong Helmet could not defend him. They left the Ensign Francis de Rebolledo stun’d, for Dead, and when the Enemy drew off, he made a Shift to get up and escape, with his Head cruelly cut, and was cur’d in the City, where he told many Particulars of that miserable Slaughter, about 30 more escap’d, and among them F. Farfan, who all got off by being in the Rear, and light of Foot. Don Lewis was kill’d there by the same People that had slain his Father, and with him the General Alcega, Don Thomas Bravo, Captain Cebrian de Madrid, and only one of all the Governor’s Servants surviv’d.

Chineses rejoyce with the Spaniard’s Heads. The Sangleyes cut off the Heads of the Slain, and hoisting them on the Points of their Spears, run in at their Nostrils, carry’d them to present to their Chinese General, who was in the Fort, and his Name Hontay. He, and the Rest, view’d the Heads, and set them up with much rejoycing, returning Thanks to Heaven, and the Earth, according to their Custom, for that Victory; thinking they should meet with little Opposition from the Spaniards after that.

All this Day, being the Feast of S. Francis, and the next, the Enemy spent in rejoycing. At Manila they were burning the Suburbs, and Houses without the Walls, and consider’d what Order they should take against [219]the Parian; for tho’ many Thousands of Sangleyes us’d to inhabit it, there were not then 1500 remaining, and among them 500 Anhayes Merchants, a peaceable and rich People, of whom there was no mistrust; the rest were Handicrafts, no Way suspected. About 50 of the others were secur’d, who had their Hair shorn, and were mix’d among the Christian Sangleys. These gave Information, that they had burnt Monasteries of Religious People in several Places. Some Clergy-Men, with abundance of Women and Children, secur’d themselves in the Church of S. Francis del Christians defend themselves in a Belfry. Monte, and some Companies of Sangleyes coming to besiege them, they went up into a Belfry, where having fixt a Sheet on a Staff, they display’d it like Colours, the People appearing at the Windows, the Women and Children ringing the Bells, rating the Enemy, and bidding them come on. Our Men often firing two Muskets, which was all they had, the Sangleyes durst not approach, being more afraid than they had Occasion, and accordingly drew off to a strong Post, whence they were to continue the War.

Francis de las Missas does the Rebels much Harm. The Governour endeavour’d to prevent the News of the Slaughter spreading abroad, lest it should discourage the Country; and gave out, that the Slain were at S. Francis del monte. He warn’d the Justices to get together all the Indian Servants, because there were scarce any Spaniards left; and sent the Factor Francis de las Missas to cruise upon the Coast, with three Rowing Vessels, towards the Enemies Fort, to cut off all their Provisions. The Factor perform’d his Part so well, that he sunk some Vessels, and burnt those that carry’d them Provisions. He kill’d many of their Men at the Mouth of a River that falls into the Sea, about the Fort call’d Navotas; look’d for the Clergy-men they were said to have kill’d in their Houses; and sent away to S. Francis del monte, a Party of 500 Japoneses, with three Spaniards, and two Franciscan Fryers, to gather the Remains of that Slaughter. In his Way, he pass’d by the Enemy’s Fort, with a Design to do them some Harm, if he could, and found they had abandon’d it, retiring to the Parian, to joyn the rest and besiege the City, being puff’d up with their late Victory. This happen’d on Monday the 6th. The Japoneses kill 200 Chineses, and burn their Fort. Japoneses search’d the Fort, where they found about 200 sick and wounded Chineses, whom they slew, and saving abundance of Provisions, burnt the Fort with all their Warlike Preparations, which could not be serviceable against the first Owners. They went up to the Monastery, and return’d thence the same Day to the City.

The few Sangleyes in the Parian were no less apprehensive, than the Rebels send to stir up the others. greater Number in the Fort, both because they were so near, and for that it was suppos’d they would joyn their Companions, when they saw the Spaniards decline. Besides, it was known, that those in Rebellion had sent to desire them to come over to their Party, giving them Notice of the Spaniards they had kill’d. This was discover’d by a Sangley, who swimming over, was taken by the Sentinel on the Vessels that were in the River, who, having confess’d on the Rack, that he was a Spy, and went Spy executed. forward and backward with Intelligence, was put to Death. On the other Hand, it was consider’d, that though the safest Way was to kill all those People, yet it was not just to execute Men that were not convicted of any Crime; especially since they came to the Philippine Islands, to trade upon [220]the publick Faith, and the Governour having engag’d for their Safety, in case they were quiet, and intermeddled not in the Rebellion. For this Reason some Councils of War were held among the Commanders, at which the Counsellors, and the Archbishop, were also present; and considering, that the Rebels earnestly applying to those in the Parian, to side with them, it was possible they might be perverted, and in case they did not revolt, The Governour would secure the Anhayes. those Mutiniers would kill them, it was resolv’d, That the Anhayes Merchants should be perswaded to retire with their Effects into the Monastery of S. Augustin, which is a strong House within Manila. The Governour having himself in Person acquainted them herewith, as also by some of the Counsellors and their Friends, yet they were irresolute; and tho’ some of them committed the keeping of their Goods to others, they stay’d themselves to be Spectators of the Event. The last Care taken of them, was Don Pedro’s going in Person to the Parian that same Day; and about an Hour after, many of the Enemies Colours appear’d on the other Side of the River, along the Bank of it. They came from the Fort, which was a quarter of a League from the City.

Chineses pass over to Parian. Some of the Sangleyes began to swim over to the Parian, and others came in Boats and Floats provided for that Purpose. Their Passage could not be obstructed, because the Galiots and Carcoas belonging to the Navy were then among the Pintados, to defend those Islands; Intelligence having been brought, that a Fleet of Mindanaos and Ternates was coming to invade them. The Rebels enter’d the Parian with great Cries, bringing the Heads of the Spaniards they had kill’d on S. Francis’s Day, run through the Nostrils. The Governour observing their Resolution, order’d the Captains, Gaspar Perez, and Peter de Arceo, who were at Tondo, to come over to the City with their Companies. The Enemy being return’d to the Parian, with that dismal Spectacle of the Heads, began to perswade the Anhayes, who had not yet declar’d, but not being able to prevail, and finding them positive on the contrary, and that they blam’d what they had done, The Chineses murder the Anhayes. they fell upon and butcher’d above 200 of them. Then they plunder’d Part of their Silks, which made them Cloaths of several Colours. They Some hang themselves to avoid their Fury. also hang’d other Merchants, and some, being about 80 in Number, hang’d themselves, to prevent falling into their Hands, which is very frequent in that Country. One of these was the Sangley General himself, call’d, Hontay. F. John Pobre, formerly a Captain, since a Franciscan Fryer, and at this Time compell’d by Necessity to take up Arms again, reported, That the mutinous Sangleyes, having perswaded the Anhayes to follow their Example, they appointed Chican, a rich Sangley, and Master of the Spanish Tongue, to answer for them. He, before he would speak his Mind, told them it would be proper to set up a Gallows, and the Heads of the Spaniards on it, that being in View, they might all take Courage to fight manfully. They approv’d of his Counsel, and the Gallows being set up, he Strange Death of Chican. went up himself to range the Heads, and taking out a Rope he had carry’d up unseen, put it about his own Neck, and hang’d himself in the Sight of them all.

The same day Captain Peter de Brito, being with his Company in the Cathedral, which had been assign’d him the Night before, for his Post, and observing that a certain House was not uncover’d, contrary to the Proclamation [221]made the Day before, commanding them all to have the Palm-Tree Leaves and Nipa, wherewith they are thatch’d, taken off, for Fear of another Conflagration; he sent to take it off. The Ensign Andrew Obregon went up to this Purpose to the very Top, and there found Baptist hidden with his Sword and Dagger, whom some Women endeavour’d to conceal. Being ask’d by the Ensign, what he did there? he answer’d, He was Baptist Chief of the Rebels taken. taking off the Nipa. The next Question he was quite dash’d, and his own Conscience suddenly accusing him, he said, Do not kill me, Sir. The Ensign mildly encouraging, bid him go to the Governour, who expected him, and stay’d to take off the Covering of Nipa. Then coming down saw some Soldiers, and went up again with them. By this Time certain Indian Women had hid Baptist in a Chamber, where the Soldiers entering by Force, bound him, and he was cast into Prison among other Chineses. The Tryal was short, as is usual in the Martial Way, and in the mean while the Prisoners were remov’d to Captain Gallinato’s House. Thither came a Japonese Boy, enquiring for Baptist. They found his Pocket full of Squibs, and another Boy with a Piece of a Wax-Candle, all which was given them by one of Baptist’s Slaves. The Squibs were all bloody, perhaps it was some Christian’s Gore. He own’d himself he had His Confession. so great a Hand in the Rebellion, that it was not without good Reason they would have made him their Chief. That the Sangleys call’d out upon his Name. That Hontay was troubled at his Absence, saying, He Why Hontay hang’d himself. must needs be in some Trouble, since he did not come to Head them; and for this Reason he hang’d himself. Next appear’d the Ring-leaders of the Mutiny, and it was prov’d against them, That they had set up a Pole on the Place call’d el Cerro, or the Hill of Calocan, and on it a black Flag, with two Chinese Characters on it, which imported CUNTIEN, the Signification whereof is, IN OBEDIENCE TO HEAVEN. Other Colours were found with the Army that fought at Dilao, with a Cut on them containing the Chinese Figures of Encan, or Baptist.

Several Religious Men, at this Time fought against the Mutiniers; but Brother Antony Flores, a brave Man. among them all, special Praise is due to the Valour of the Lay-Brother Antony Flores, of the Order of S. Augustin. He was born in Estremadura, had serv’d in Flanders, was a Slave in Turkey above 20 Years, and made his Escape out of the Inland Country by his Valour and Industry. He went over to the Philippine Islands, where he chearfully took the Habit, in the Monastery of S. Augustin at Manila. He always show’d great Humility in Obedience, and lost nothing of his Courage in the Simplicity of a Religious Life. Him the Governour order’d to scour the River, in the Galliot belonging to the Monastery, fighting the Ships and Champanes of the Sangleyes. One Night after having drove from the Shore above 200 Vessels, Does good Service. burnt some large ones, and sunk others, he stay’d in the Middle of the River Passig, to observe the Sangleyes. Between eleven and twelve, he perceiv’d that one of the Rebels was swimming over to the City, and the Darkness causing him to mistake, he lighted upon brother Antony’s Galliot. Takes a Spy. He having seen him before, the Indian Servants had the Opportunity of laying hold of him, drew him by the Hair into the Galliot, and carry’d him to the Governour. He was put to the Rack, and there confess’d, That he came to acquaint the Sangleyes of the Parian, that the next Day those [222]on the other Side would cross the River, and then they would all together, with the Engines they had provided, attack the Wall, put all the Spaniards to the Sword, and make themselves Masters of the Islands. The Governour having this Intelligence, took the necessary Precautions for the next Day, and Brother Antony return’d to his Monastery, where he furnish’d himself with Meal and other Provisions for his Galliot. He carry’d two Muskets for himself, and drew his Vessel into a Creek the River makes, that runs by the Walls of Manila, among abundance of Manglans, which are Trees growing in any watrey land, and so thick, that Men may easily be hid among them, without being perceiv’d. There Brother Antony lay in Ambush supposing, or knowing, that the Sangleyes must of Necessity pass that Way, He alone kills 600 Chineses. as being the narrowest in the River, and nearest to the Wall. Nor was he deceiv’d in his Expectation, for they came very early in the Morning, and were passing over in great Numbers from the first Peep of Day, till very late. The Fryer had put above 200 Bullets into two Pouches, and kept firing the two Muskets from before five in the Morning, at break of Day till six in the Evening, cooling them with Vinegar; nor did he ever fire at less than a Company of 20 or 30 Sangleyes, that no Shot might be lost. It was concluded for certain, that he alone that Day kill’d above 600 of those Barbarians. The Governour afterwards sent him in pursuit of those that remain’d, with a thousand Indians, and he slew above 3000 Sangleyes, putting to flight the small Remains of them.

Desperate Sangleyes kill’d from the Wall. At this Time many of the Sangleyes that had cross’d the River, appear’d in the Streets of the Parian; who standing in Sight of the Walls, with their own, or the Weapons they had taken from the Spaniards they slew, call’d upon those who defended the City, whence they made several Musket Shot at them, wounding and killing many, for they came within good Aim, after a desperate Manner. It was reported, they had taken their Anfion, that is, a Composition of Opium, as the Turks do, and is also us’d by the People of the Moluccos, when they are to give Battel; for it doses and gives them a brutal Courage. A Piece of Cannon was planted on the Gate of the Parian, and did considerable Execution, and no Man Opium gives Courage. would have suspected that any had been there. Some Japoneses and Natives of the Philippines sally’d out upon the Sangleyes, with good Success; for they kill’d many of them, and particularly such as had been wounded by the small Shot, and Brass Guns on the Wall. They thinking the Parian Japoneses and Indians fight the Chineses. was a Shelter for Cowards, set Fire to it, and went out to fight the Japoneses and Indians. The Sangleyes from the Houses, where they lay conceal’d, kill’d a Portuguese Captain, and wounded three others, with small Shot. One of them was Ruy Gonzalez de Sequeyra, Commander in Chief of the Moluccos. The Sangleyes remov’d to the Monastery of Candelaria, that is of Candlemas, whence they sally’d more furiously than from the Parian.

Fight of Spaniards and Chineses. On Tuesday in the Morning, Captain Gallinato march’d towards the Candelaria, with about 500 Spaniards, and some Japoneses. The Enemy refus’d not the Engagement, but came out above 4000 strong. Our Men made themselves Masters of a Bridge, whence they pour’d some Volleys upon them. Perceiving the Loss they sustain’d, they fell back, to draw the Spaniards into open Field, and serve them as they had done Don Lewis; [223]but tho’ some Soldiers were so bold as to go into the Church, and plunder Part of what the Sangleyes had robb’d in the Parian, yet some of them Slaughter of the Latter. retir’d hastily to the Bridge, with the Loss of three Spaniards, and five Japoneses, besides the wounded, the Enemy charging them in a Body. Of the Chineses 360 of the boldest were kill’d, which made them flinch with Fear. The same Day in the Evening, a Party of them came up to assault the Wall, where it was lowest, bringing scaling Ladders, and other Necessaries, cover’d with Silk; but the Cannon play’d so smartly on them, that they lost their Ladders, and many of them their Lives. This same Afternoon there was an Engagement on the Side of the Parian, where the Enemy brought on two great Machines, like Carts, made the Night before, with Wheels, and stuff’d with Quilts, Blankets, and such Materials, to defend them against the Cannon, and small Shot. The Governour was apprehensive that they had some Fire-works, they being great Masters at them; but was soon satisfy’d, for having fir’d at them with the Piece that was over the Gate of the Parian, where one of his Servants was Gunner, it carry’d away a considerable Part of the foremost Machine, and with it a good Number of the Sangleyes that drew underneath, and were on it. However they advanc’d boldly, till the Gun tore others in Pieces, and they retir’d, abandoning the Machine. Still the Fight grew hot about the River, and several Men went out in Boats, and others did Execution thro’ the Loop-Holes. The Ensign John Guerra de Cervantes, Their machine destroy’d. sent out the Japonese and Native Soldiers, and they drew near to the Parian, under the Shelter of the Cannon on the Walls, so courageously, that they set fire to the best of it, being the Houses of the Anhayes; which quite discourag’d those that were in them, especially when they observ’d they The Spaniards fire the Parian. had secur’d the River, and the Boats, and taken their Musquetiers. It was judg’d that above 2500 Sangleyes perish’d this Day by Fire and Sword, besides those at the Candelaria, and other Straglers. Having left the Shelter of the Parian, they took up in the Church of the Candelaria, but the next Morning none of them appear’d. They cross’d the River on Wednesday, Kill 2500 Chineses. and some of our Men were drowned pursuing them too eagerly. They took the Way to the Village call’d Tabuco, 5 Leagues from Manila, which is very populous, and plentiful. Here Captain Don Lewis de Velasco found They fly. them fortify’d, and defended with Doors and Boards, towards the Lake And are pursu’d with great Slaughter. Vay; whence he ply’d them with small Shot, and kill’d many, they no longer able to endure the Damage they receiv’d, kindled many Fires in the Night, to prevent being observ’d, and march’d away towards S. Paul’s, a Village 16 Leagues from Manila, where they came so thin, that they were not above 6000, having lost very many in the Way to Tabuco. There Capt. Velasco kill’d. Don Lewis fell upon them again; and pursuing them after they quitted the Village, was so hot, that they kill’d him four Soldiers, and two barefoot Fryers, the one a Priest, the other a Lay-Brother.

They made a Halt at S. Paul’s, intending to reap the Rice, which was then almost Ripe, because that is a forwarder Country than Pampangua. Another Slaughter of Chineses. Before they came to S. Paul’s, a Detachment of 1500 of them turn’d off from the main Body towards the Mountains of Pace. The Spaniards and Natives overtook them, and tho’ they stood to it, our Men play’d their Parts so well, that they cut them all off, and recover’d Part of their Booty. [224]

The Fort the Sangleyes had rais’d at S. Paul’s was of Palm-Trees, whence they made Excursions to fight, reap the Rice, and ravage the Country. They thought it convenient to divide themselves into two equal Bodies; the one stay’d in the Fort, the other went away to Vatangas, seven Leagues distant towards the Sea-Coast, with a Design, as was thought, to build Ships, for which Purpose they carry’d Carpenters, Labourers, Tools, Rebels design to build Ships. Nails, and all other Necessaries. The Governour reflecting on their Design, sent some vigilant Persons towards the Bay of Vatangas, to secure the Vessels on the Coast, that the Enemy might not make use of them, and get over to other Islands, which would have been of ill Consequence.

The Governour believing the Design of the Sangleyes was to gain Time, The Rebels press’d. and perhaps to expect some Supplies from China, which might be promis’d by the Mandarines, before they went away; he thought it requisite to bring the War to a speedy Conclusion, because the Enemy fortify’d themselves daily, and made Excursions from their Forts, to scour the Country, and gather in the Rice; perswading the Natives to joyn with them; tho’ they were so far from complying, that they kill’d all they could meet with. There were several other Reasons which prov’d that the greatest Safety consisted in Expedition, and therefore abundance of Spaniards and Natives, by the Governour’s Order, were always in Quest of the straggling Chineses. However it was judg’d expedient to press them yet nearer, and not allow them Time, as they wish’d, till the Rice was ripe, since Hunger must prove their greatest Enemy. To this Purpose it was thought Expedient to make use of trusty neighbouring People.

Pampangua is a Province ten Leagues from Manila, beyond the Town of Pampangua describ’d. Tondo, over the River Pasig, on which the Citizens have convenient small Vessels. The Country is subject to be overflow’d, by reason of the many Rivers, and because the Natives draw Trenches from them, to water the Rice, and other Grain. The whole District is of twelve Leagues, all inhabited, and has seven Churches, belonging to the Order of S. Augustin. The Natives are Brave, Docible and Loyal, receive the Christian Faith, and are steadfast in it; and richer than those of other Parts of the Island. Captain Ferdinand de Avalos was Alcalde mayor, or chief Governour of Pampangua, and the Governour General having acquainted him by Letter Service done by the Alcayde of Pampangua. with the Rebellion of the Sangleyes, requiring him to send Provisions and Arms for the War, and not to leave any Enemies behind, he perform’d both Things, with extraordinary Care. He furnish’d him with great Store of Rice, Palm-Wine, and a considerable Number of Cows and Calves; and took above 400 Sangleyes, who being carry’d to a Creek in the River, bound two and two, and deliver’d to the Japoneses, they slew them all. F. James de Guevara of the Order of S. Augustin, Prior of Manila, who writ this Relation, preach’d to them first, and only five of them forsook their Idolatry, and were baptiz’d. At the same Time he sent the Governour 4000 Pampanguos, arm’d after their Country Fashion, with Bows, Arrows, Half-Pikes, Shields, and long broad Poniards. They came to Manila with great Shouts, and as if sure of Victory, fell upon the Enemy, who increas’d still, the more they were destroy’d.

This obliged the Governour, notwithstanding some Opposition, to send a Number of Spaniards, and Japoneses, with a strong Party of the Pampangua [225]Indians, well arm’d and provided, under the Command of the Captain and Major Azcueta, a brave and vigilant Commander, well acquainted with the Major Azcueta sent against the Chineses. Country, ordering him to draw near the Enemy; yet not to engage, because they were a desperate barbarous People in their first Onsets, but to alarm them Day, and Night, on every Side, obstructing their Excursions, that so they might want Provisions, and consequently be oblig’d to dislodge, for if he could remove them but twice, he might cut them off, as it happen’d accordingly. The Major departed Manila, with these Orders, by the Way of the River. On Munday the 20th of October, he came in Sight of the Enemy, who was still in the Fort at S. Paul’s, and there he had some Actions. Having cast up some Works, for his greater Security, in the Quarters he took up, the Enemy’s sally’d out of their Fort, and some of those who valu’d themselves on their Bravery advanc’d to fight the Spaniards in their Posts, with as much Boldness, as could be expected from Men in Despair, and quite distracted. Thus being cut off from Water, streightned, often alarm’d, never suffer’d to rest, and such as ventur’d out cut off, they dismay’d, and dislodg’d in the Night very silently, marching towards Batangas, where their other Body was. However their Departure could not be conceal’d from the Vigilany of our Men, who march’d after them, Martin de Herrera, Captain of the Governours Guard, leading the Van, which consisted of Spaniards, and the bravest of the Natives. He overtook the Enemy, and began to fall so hard upon their Rear, that they were He cuts off one entire Body of them.forc’d to face about; and after killing above 800 of them as they pass’d a narrow but deep River, our main Body coming up attack’d the rest three several Ways, on an Eminency they had taken, and slew above 1000 more; those that escap’d perishing the next Day, so that only one was taken alive, tho’ the Governour would have had many sav’d to serve in the Galleys; but the Japoneses and Natives are so bloody, that neither his Orders, nor Major Azcueta’s Severity, or the other Commanders could curb them.

The Men rested that Day, having travel’d above five Leagues over Grounds full of Sedges, and Bogs; and prepar’d to proceed to Batangas, to fight the other Body of Rebels, carrying some Fields Pieces. The Major had dismiss’d the Japoneses, because they, alledging they were not Soldiers in Pay, would return to Manila. He had only 50 Soldiers left with him, and found the Enemy well fortify’d, and furnish’d with Provisions, as having been Masters of the Country. He spoke to them in peaceable Manner, as he had Offers those at Batangas Terms. done before to the other Party, offering good Terms, if they would submit to the Governour; but Obstinacy had stopp’d their Ears, and excluded all Hopes, so that they would not admit of any Accommodation. Our Men drew near, three several Ways with their small Shot, and the Pampangua Indians, who were brave, supported by the Spaniards, who led and encourag’d them, attack’d the Fort; but the Defendants behav’d themselves so bravely, that they caus’d them to retire, with the Loss of four or five Pampanguos kill’d, and some wounded. Our Men came on again, and the Captain of the Guards, who Commanded that Attack, with the Men under his Charge, and others that joyn’d him, fell on with such Fury, that they enter’d Destroys them all. the Fort, and put them to the Sword. About 600 escap’d of whom they made an End a few Days after. Some few above a Hundred were saved, who were carry’d alive to serve in the Galleys. Of our Men eight [226]Natives and six Japoneses were kill’d in those two Actions; but never a Spaniard, tho’ many were wounded, and among them the Captain of the Guards, who had both his Thighs run through across with a Lance.

Encan and others Executed. On the 22d Encan, otherwise call’d Baptist, was executed, being hang’d and quarter’d, his Head set up in the Parian, and his Goods confiscated. The following Days the like Justice was executed on other guilty Chineses; and had the Laws of their own Country been observ’d, the same Punishment had been inflicted on their whole Families and Kindred.

End of the Chinese Rebellion. Thus was that Conflagration suppress’d, which threatned the utter Ruin of the Philippine Islands, and thus above 23000 Chineses perish’d, few above 500 being left for the Galleys, and all those Isles being restor’d to unexpected Peace. Some affirm, the Number of the Sangleyes slain was greater, but that the Magistrates conceal’d it, for fear Notice should be taken of their Fault in admitting so many to live in the Country, contrary to the King’s Prohibition; yet in vain does Subtilty contend with Truth.

Don Pedro had receiv’d some Intelligence of his Majesties approving of the Enterprize on the Moluccos; and whilst he expected to see the Effect of that Resolution, writ all the Ways he could; as also through India, to solicite those who were commission’d in that Affair. Being deliver’d of the Trouble of the Sangleyes, he bent his Mind to provide all Necessaries for the Fleet, against he should be commanded to set out; but the End of this Ill Effects of the Chinese Rebellion. War, was the Beginning of other Difficulties at Manila. All Handicrafts ceas’d, Works were lay’d aside, and Provisions grew scarce; which Scarcity made all Things dear; whereas before there was Abundance, all Things laborious being done by the Sangleyes, by Reason that the Native Indians are neither willing, nor industrious at such Affairs. They had quite laid aside tilling the Land; breeding of Fowl, and weaving of Blankets, all which they formerly us’d to do, in the Time of their Infidelity. The Parian or Chinese Quarter was particularly ruin’d with Fire and Sword. That Place us’d to be so plentiful and advantageous, that when Don Pedro came first to Manila, he writ concerning it to a Kinsman of his in Spain, as follows. Wealth of the Parian. This City is remarkeable for stately Buildings, which have astonish’d me. I shall only mention one Particular, which is the chiefest, That it has a Suburb, or Quarter, full of all Sorts of Silks, and Gold, and Mechanick Trades, and 400 Shops full of this Sort, with above 8000 Men generally dealing in them; and at the Time when Fleets come from China with Merchandize, which is at this Season there are always above 13 or 14000 Men. They bring extraordinary Things, such as are not in Europe. Don Pedro was also afraid that the Slaughter lately made would obstruct the Trade, and that the Ships would not come as usual, with Provisions, from China. But the greater and more general Apprehension was that instead of Merchants, Ships of War would come to revenge the Sangleyes. He therefore sent away F. James F. Guevara sent through India to Spain. de Guevara, Prior of Manila, into Spain, by the Way of India, with an Account of what had been done, and of his Fears. The many Accidents that befell him in India, Persia, Turkey, and Italy, made him spend three Years before he came to Court, where he then found other fresher Intelligence.

At the same Time Don Pedro sent Captain Mark de la Cueva, with F. Lewis Gandullo, a Dominican, to Macao, a City in China, where the Portugueses [227]reside, with Letters for the Commander in Chief and Council of that City, giving them an Account of the Rebellion of the Sangleyes, and the Event of it, that they, upon any Rumour of a Fleet providing in China, might Message to China. send him Notice of it several Ways. They had also Letters for the Tutones, or Tsuntos, Abytaos, and Visitors of the Provinces of Canton, and Chincheo, acquainting them with the Guilt of the Chineses, which oblig’d the Spaniards to punish them so severely. The Messengers at their Arrival, found all the Country peaceably dispos’d, notwithstanding that some Sangleyes flying from Manila in Champanes, had given an Account of their Commotions. The Coming of these Spaniards to Macao was soon known at Chincheo, and presently some of the richest Captains, who us’d Manila most, came to visit them; their Names were Guansan, Sinu, and Guachuan. They being fully inform’d of the Truth of the Fact, took upon them to deliver the Letters Don Pedro sent to the Mandarines, who receiv’d them by their Means. The Merchants of Chincheo took Courage to trade in the Philippine Islands, and sail’d in their own Ships from Macao, with our Messengers, carrying Abundance of Powder, Saltpeter, and Lead, wherewith the Chineses trade again at Manila. publick Magazines were stor’d. In May following 13 Chinese Ships arriv’d at Manila, and many more after them, continuing that Trade.

Don Pedro sent the Ships that had brought Supplies from the Islands, to Spanish Ship lost. New Spain; the Commodore of them was cast away, and not a Man nor a Plank sav’d. He ceas’d not at the same Time to store the City with Provisions and Ammunition, that he might be at Leasure to undertake the Expedition against the Moluccos. Now arriv’d Colonel John de Esquivel, Esquivel with 600 Men at Manila from New Spain. from Mexico, with 600 Soldiers, and Intelligence that farther Provision was making in New Spain of Men, Stores, Ammunition, and Money, by the King’s Order. All came in due Season to Manila; and there at that Time dy’d the Arch-Bishop Don Miguel de Benavides, generally lamented by all the Country. The Chinese Ships that came again to trade, brought the Governour the Answers to his Letters, contain’d in three others, all to the same Effect, from the Tuton, or Tsunto, that is, the Viceroy, the Hayton, and the Visitor General of the Province of Chincheo. Being translated by the Interpreters, they were found to this Effect.

Chinese Letter to the Governour. To the Chief Commander of Luzon. Having understood that the Chineses that went to Trade and Trafick in the Kingdom of Luzon, have been kill’d by the Spaniards, I have inquir’d into the Cause of that Slaughter, and intreated the King to do Justice, on those who had been the Occasion of so much Mischief, that the like may be prevented for the future, and the Merchants enjoy Peace and Quietness. Some years since, before I came hither as Visitor, a Sangley, whose Name was Tioneg, went over to Cabit, in Luzon, with three Mandarines, and the King’s Leave, to seek for Gold and Silver, which was all a Cheat; for he found neither Gold nor Silver, and therefore I beseech’d the King to punish that Deceiver, Tioneg, that the Discovery of the Cheat of the three Mandarines above. World might see how impartially Justice is administer’d in China. It was in the Time of the late Viceroy, and Eunuch, that Tioneg and his Companion, whose Name was Yanlion, told the said Lye. Since then I intreated the King to cause all the Papers relating to Tioneg’s Case, to be copy’d, and the said Tioneg, and the Proceedings against him, to be lay’d before his Majesty, and I my self saw those Papers, and was sensible that all the said Tioneg had said [228]was a Lie. I writ to acquaint the King that the Castillas suspected we intended Chineses punish’d for Falshood. to make War on them, on Account of the Lyes Tioneg had told, and therefore they had slain above 30000 Chineses at Luzon. The King did what I desir’d, and accordingly punish’d the aforesaid Yanlion, ordering him to be put to Death; and caus’d Tioneg’s Head to be cut off, and hung up in a Cage. The Chineses that Dy’d at Luzon were not to blame, and I, and some others have acquainted the King with so much; as also with the coming of two English Ships upon these Coasts of Chincheo, a Thing very dangerous for China, that the King may resolve what is to be done in two Affairs of such Consequence. We also Writ to the King, to order two Sangleyes to be punish’d, for having shown the Harbour to the English. And after having Writ as aforesaid to the King, he answer’d, What did the English Ships come into China for? Whether they came to Rob? That they should be order’d to depart thence immediately to Luzon; and to tell those of Luzon that they should not give Credit to the wicked and lying Persons among the Chineses; and that they should immediately kill the two Sangleyes. As for the rest we writ to him about, he answer’d that we should do our Wills. The Viceroy, the Eunuch and I, after receiving this Order, do now send these our letters to the Governour of Luzon, that his Lordship may be acquainted with the Grandeur of the King of China; for he is so Great that he governs all the Sun and Moon shine on; as also that the Governour of Luzon may know how well this so large Kingdom is govern’d, Japoneses expell’d Corea. whose King none has dar’d to offend this long Time. And tho’ the Japoneses have attempted to disturb Corea, which belongs to the Government of China, that have not succeeded; but have been expell’d thence, and Corea has remain’d very peaceable and quiet, as is well known by Fame to the People of Luzon.

The last Year, when we were inform’d, that so many Chineses were slain at Luzon, on the Account of Tioneg’s falshood, we met many Mandarines of us to agree to propose to the King, that he would revenge so great a Spaniards charg’d with the Slaughter of the Chineses. Slaughter. We said, that the Land of Luzon is poor, of no Value, and that formerly it was the Habitation of none but Devils and Snakes; and that so many Sangleyes having of late Years gone to Trade with the Castillas, they are now grown so great; the said Sangleyes having labour’d so much there, building Walls, and Houses, making Gardens, and other Things very Advantageous to the Castillas. And since this is so, why had not the Castillas consider’d these Things, nor been grateful for these good Turns, but on the contrary so cruelly destroy’d so many Men? And tho’ we, two or three Times, Writ to the King as above, he being Angry for the aforesaid Things, answer’d us, That it was not convenient to take Revenge, nor make War on the People of Luzon, for three Reasons. First, Because the Castillas have for many Years past, been Friends to the Chineses. Secondly, Because it could not be known, whether the Victory would fall to the Castillas, or the Chineses. Thirdly, and lastly, Because the People kill’d by the Castillas were base, and ungrateful to their Native Country of China, their Parents and Kindred, since they had not return’d to China in so many years; which People the King said he did not much value, for the aforesaid Reasons; and he only order’d the Viceroy, the Eunuch, and me to Write this Letter by the Embassador; that the People of Luzon may know the King of China has a [229]great Soul is very Patient and Merciful, since he has not order’d War to be made on the Inhabitants of Luzon. And his Justice will appear, by his causing the Falshood of Tioneg to be punish’d. And since the Spaniards are a discreet People, how can they not be troubled for having kill’d so many Men; and repent of it, and be kind to the Chineses that are left. For if the Castillas bear the Chineses good Will, and restore the Sangleyes that have remain’d of the War, and pay the Money that is due, and restore the Goods taken from the Sangleyes, there will be Amity betwixt this Kingdom, and that, and Trading Ships shall go every Year; otherwise the King will not give Leave for any Ships to trade; but on the contrary will cause 1000 Ships of Mandarines Threats. War to be built, with Soldiers, and Kindred of the slain, and with other Nations, and Kingdoms that pay Homage to China, and will make war without sparing any Person, and then the Kingdom of Luzon shall be given to those People that pay Acknowledgement to China. The Visitor General’s Letter was writ on the 12th of the second Month, which, according to our Reckning, is March; the Eunuchs on the 16th, and the Viceroys on the 22d of the same Month and Year.

The Governours Answer, to the Mandarines. The Governour return’d an Answer to these Letters by the same Messengers, in Terms full of Civility, and Authority. He gave an Account of the Rebellion of the Sangleyes from its first Rise; justifying the Spaniards for their natural Defence, and the Punishment they had inflicted on the Criminals. He tells them, no State can subsist without punishing the Wicked, or rewarding the Good; and therefore he does not repent that Execution, because it was to suppress those that would have destroy’d us. That the Visitor ought to consider what he would do, in Case the like had happen’d to him in China. That the only Thing which troubled him was, that he could not save some Sangley Merchants Anhayes, who dy’d among the guilty; but that it was not possible to prevent it, because the severity of War will not allow the killing of some, and exempting of others; especially, they not being known by the Soldiers in the Heat of Action. That using Mercy towards those that were taken alive, he condemn’d them to row in the Galleys, the Punishment substituted among the Castillas for such as deserve Death. Yet if it should be thought in China that it ought to be moderated, they shall be set at Liberty. But let it be consider’d, said Don Pedro, that the not punishing of so heinous an Offence, may be the Occasion of their falling into it again, which would exclude all Mercy. The Goods of the Chineses that were kill’d are safe laid up, and to show I had no other Motive, but the Execution of Justice, I will order them to be immediately deliver’d to their Heirs, or to such Persons, as they of Right belong to. Nothing but Justice inclines me to any of these Things. Your saying, that unless I release the Prisoners, there will be Leave granted in China to the Kindred of the slain in the Rebellion, to come in Arms to Manila, does not move me in the least; because I take the Chineses to be so wise, that they will not go upon such Undertakings upon a slight Occasion; especially, when no Provocation has been given them on our Side. And in Case they should be of another Mind there, we Spaniards are Men that know how to defend our Right, our Religion, and our Territories. Let not the Chineses think they are Lords of the World, as they pretend; for we Castillas, who have measur’d every Foot of it, very well know the Lands of the Chineses; and therefore [230]they ought to understand, that the King of Spain maintains Wars with Kings as powerful as theirs, and checks, and gives them much Trouble. Nor is it any Thing new with us, when our Enemies think they have brought us under, to be wasting and destroying their Lands, and never give over till we have cast them out of their Thrones, and wrested their Scepters out of their Hands. I should be very sorry the Commerce should be interrupted; but at the same Time, believe the Chineses are not willing to lose it, since it is so advantageous to them, for they carry Home our Silver, which never wastes, in Exchange for their Commodities, which are slight Things, soon spoil’d. It was discreetly done, not to admit the English Ships that appear’d upon the Coast, for they are not Spaniards, but their Enemies, and Pyrates; for which Reason they should have been punish’d, had they come to Manila. To conclude, for as much as we Spaniards always justify our Proceedings, and value our selves upon the Worlds not being able to say, we Usurp the Right of others, or make War on our Friends, what is here promis’d shall be perform’d. And the Chineses may take Notice, for the future, that we never do any Thing out of Fear, or on Account of our Enemies Threats. Don Pedro concludes, offering the Continuation of Friendship, upon new Assurances of Peace, with the Kingdom of China; saying, he would, at the proper Time, give Liberty to their Prisoners he had in the Galleys; Tho’ he design’d first to make Use of them, and did so in his Expedition to the Moluccos, which he was then preparing for; and all this was punctually perform’d.

The Emperour of Japan’s Letter. He receiv’d other Letters at the same Time, from the Emperor of Japan, wherein, after returning him Thanks for a Present of Wine of Grapes, which Don Pedro had sent him, with other Things of Value, he Encourag’d him to Trade, and desir’d he would not send him any Christian Preachers, without his Consent. For, says he, this Country is call’d Xincoco, which signifies, Dedicated to Idols; which have been honour’d with much Commendation by our Fore-Fathers, whose Actions I alone can not reverse, and therefore it is not convenient that your Law be spread abroad, or preach’d in Japan; and if your Lordship is willing to entertain Amity with me, and these Kingdoms, do as I would have you. So says the Japonese. Don Pedro answer’d and appeas’d him, so that the preaching was continu’d in his Dominions.

Dutch Squadron. This same Year 1604, the Provinces of Holland and Zealand, according to their Custom, fitted out a Squadron of twelve tall Ships, well equipp’d, with some smaller Vessels, and, as if they had been Lords of the Winds and of the Seas, set Sail for India, the known Way, arriving prosperously, in a short Time, at the Cape of Good Hope. All the Captains had been there before, and the Pilots valu’d themselves upon no less Experience. The Admiral was Stephen Drage. Beginning to visit their Forts, and Factories, in Order to take some Prizes, as well as Trade, they met with two small Ships, loaden with Ivory, at the Bar of Mozambique. They chas’d them, and tho’ Takes two Portugues Ships. they fled amain, being pursu’d with no less Swiftness, the Dutch Robbers overtook, and after a sharp Engagement enter’d them. They burnt the one, and mann’d the other, which was a Reinforcement to prosecute their Robberies. All those Kings, and the Commanders of our Forts, receiv’d them as Friends. In September, they came to the Bar of Goa; and lay 15 Days at Bardes, in as much Security as if they had been at Amsterdam, expecting [231]the India Ships. Thence they sent away a Ship to Cambaya, to exchange the Ivory they had not long before robb’d our People of, acting not like Pyrates, but Merchants who dispose of the Wealth they pick up by Trade, and succeeded prosperously in all their Undertakings. They sent two more Ships to Bengula, with other Commodities; all which return’d in due Time considerably enrich’d. Perceiving that no Power oppos’d them, they sailed And a Foist. down the Coast of Malabar, trading wheresoever they thought fit, and took another Portuguese Vessel, called a Foist, which had 21 Oars; and after unlading the Booty, they lifted her up their Way, and took her along with them.

Zamori signifies Cæsar. After this they bent their Thoughts upon greater Matters, to which End they sent an Embassy to the Zamori, which Name imports as much as Cæsar among us, and he is King of Calicut, a Friend and Confederate with the Dutch. Having agreed upon an Interview, they fell to Trade, and whilst the rest attended Commerce, and private Gain, the Admiral consulted about State Affairs, concerting to carry on the War against the Spaniards, and more particularly the Portugueses. They settled the Time, and the Forces they were to joyn for that Effect. Then they diverted themselves with Feasting Joins with the Dutch. and Treats. At one of which, by way of Farewel, Zamori gave Admiral Drage an Emeraud, thought to be the largest and beautifullest in the World. They went on, and took some Prizes on the Coast of Java, and among them a small Ship, in which were Don Manuel de Melo, Commander in Chief of the Moluccos, and his Wife, who was oblig’d to fight as well as her Husband, and yet they could not escape Captivity. The nearer they drew to Ternate, the more considerable Encounters they had, for in They take a Portuguese Frigat at Amboyna. Sight of Amboyna they fell in with a Frigat coming from the Moluccos to Anchor in that Island, which they took, and in her Captain Antony Machado, her Commander. They stay’d at Amboyna, hoping to recover what they had lost, either by Treachery, or Force. The Year 1605 had now commenced, and they began their Work on the 23rd of February.

Drage takes Amboyna. Eight Ships and six Tenders enter’d the Port, and the Fort was surrender’d to them without much Difficulty, or Opposition. They also possess’d themselves of the Portuguese Colony. Those People seeing the Dutch so strong in Men and Cannon, durst not, nor could they well oppose them. Forty Portugueses took an Oath of Fidelity to the Prince of Orange’s Bastard Son. They put the Commander in Chief into Irons, and deliver’d the Fort to the Dutch, alledging, for an Excuse, that they had not Ammunition to defend themselves. There was another greater Mischief, which was, that the Natives favour’d the Dutch, as their Deliverers from the Portuguese Yoke; and they are well belov’d there, and in all Places where they Trade, because Fits out 40 Carcoas. of late they have taken this Course, not to meddle with their Religion, nor so much as mention it, unless, where any will embrace Christianity on their own Accord. They neither wrong’d nor distur’d any Body; and to show they would always maintain them in that Security, within five Days, they fitted out 40 Carcoas, to defend the Natives against any Enemy.

Indians well affected to the Dutch. The Admiral pick’d out three of the Ships, and went himself with them to the Islands of Banda, to load Nutmeg, Mace, and Clove, there and at Amboyna. The Fame of this Success, and the Hatred conceived against the Spaniards, were so favourable to this Nation, that at this Time the People [232]of Amboyna, Ito, Veranula, and other Places, had their Embassadors at Sunda, to expect this Fleet, which came from Home at their Request. Before they set out from Holland they had receiv’d Embassadors from the King of Achem in Sumatra, to the same End. For this Reason the Dutch give out, that they come to revenge the Wrongs, the Portugueses and Spaniards have done to the Natives, and to restore them to their Liberty. The Designs of these perfidious People were no longer a Secret; for the Admiral Drage refitted five of his Ships, and sent them to the Moluccos, to take the Fort and Kingdom of Tydore, the only one that continu’d in Subjection to Spain; and it was publickly reported, that the King of Ternate would forward the Enterprize with his Ships and Men. The Dutch Vice-Admiral sail’d with these Ships stopping by the Way to make his Advantage, take in the Refreshments in their Factories, and lade Pepper, and other Spice. Every Thing The Dutch prosperous. succeeded as they could with, tho’ they aspir’d to some Matters which requir’d a greater Power than they brought. They intended to pass by the Streight of Acapulco, and there to lie in wait for the Ships belonging to the Philippines going and coming, because they knew them to be Rich, and might take them. To this End they delay’d Time, till they could be joyn’d by the two Ships they expected from Sunda, laden with Pepper, from that plentiful, and secure Factory of theirs.

Aboard the eight Ships there was great Store of Bricks, Lime, and squared Stones, Wheele-Barrows, and other Tooles and Materials for Building; Materials for Building in the Dutch Ships. all which was to be carry’d from the aforesaid Streight, tho’ they had already began to build it at Amboyna, and landing a considerable Part of those Materials, they left there 130 Soldiers, to carry on the Works, and Garrison the Fort. At the Heels of this Fleet they expected another to lay Siege to Malaca; designing from thence to Govern India, as the Portugueses have Their Design against Malaca. done. In Order to this, they had before confederated with the Kings of Jor, Achem, and Sunda, with whose Assistance, and that of other Native Sangiacks, they were to overthrow the Power of Portugal; for they were resolv’d not to quit India, and since its Commodities enrich’d them, they would pay for the Expence of the War; besides, that they were already so wealthy, that even in Flanders the Soldiers deserted from the Arch-Duke Albertus, to serve them. Notwithstanding this extraordinary Affection, The English give the Spaniards Intelligence. wherewith the Dutch are entertain’d in all those Countries, before they came to Amboyna, two English Ships came to an Anchor near by, and acquainted the Natives, that a Dutch Squadron was coming to possess itself of the Island; but bid them not to fear, for it had none but poor scoundrel Men; and therefore they should defend themselves, offering them their Assistance, and acquainting them that the Crowns of Spain and England were then in Amity; and therefore the Subjects of them both ought to be so of Course. They slighting this favourable Opportunity, chose rather to become Their just Dealing after the Peace. Subjects to Prince Maurice, and undergo the Dutch Yoke. The English demanded Clove, and offer’d them their own Price for it, and were so just, that they never joyn’d with the Dutch. In short, Amboyna remain’d in the Enemies Hands. The People dispers’d, many of them went to Malaca, and among the rest, the Commander in chief, Don Emanuel de Melo, with some Portugueses. Others repair’d to the Island of Cebu, part of the Philippines [233]and other Places, for they had all their Liberty. They all departed Amboyna about the middle of May, but without their Goods, or Spice; being positively forbid that Trade, the Dutch alledging it was all their own.

They give Intelligence of the Dutch at Tydore. One of those English Ships sailing along those Coasts, and escaping the Ridges of Rocks, got before-hand to the Port of Tydore. They call’d the Commander in Chief of the Fort, Peter Alvarez Abreu, and inform’d him, that they left the Dutch Squadron fortifying the strong Holds at Amboyna; and that when they had reduc’d all in those Seas, they would come to fall upon Tydore. The Commander in Chief return’d Thanks for that friendly Intelligence; and among other Civilities that pass’d between them, desir’d to know the Motive that induc’d them to show such Kindness. Then the English told him, That their Kings were Friends, and to convince him of it, and the Danger he was in, offer’d him as much Ammunition as he stood in need of. They gave him Six Barrels of Powder, 100 Cannon Balls, and a Number of Head-Pieces. This made the Tydores and Portugueses begin to fortify themselves, and was the Product of the late Peace.

Four Dutch Ships at Tydore. A Month after, four great Dutch Ships, and four Tenders, came to the Island, where two of the King’s Galleons lay at Anchor, with the Portuguese Ships laden with Goods and Provisions. The Dutch Admiral sent the King of Tydore Word, That if he would deliver him that Fort, and expell the Portugueses, he would be his Friend; and desiring he would not Their Message to the King. start any Difficulties, since he might easily do it, being a peaceable King in his own Dominions; besides that, they had Men and Strength enough aboard that Squadron, to force them to consent to what they now courteously demanded. The King of Tydore sent him a Cow, and answer’d, His Answer. That he neither could, nor ought to put the Portugueses out of their Forts, nor to admit of any other Nation in their Place, till they had either voluntarily, or by Force of Arms, abandon’d their Possession. That whilst they Bravery of the Portuguese Commander. two decided the Quarrel, he would look on as Neuter. The Portuguese Commander in Chief, understanding what Messages pass’d, interrupted them, sending to let the Dutch Men know. That it was in vain to talk of surrendring the Fort, whilst he was alive, and present. That he was to treat with him, and the marry’d Men that liv’d in it about that Affair.

Dutch take two Galleons. Being come to this Resolution, the next Morning the Dutch Ships remov’d, and went to board the Portugueses that were at Tydore, two Cannon Shot from the Fort. They fought above two Hours, and so constant was Fortune to one Side, that in so short a Time, the Portugueses that remain’d alive were fain to throw themselves into the Sea, and their Galleons Bold Answer of the Portugueses. were taken, one of which they immediately burnt. The next Day another Message was sent to Tydore, wherein the Dutch directed the King to propose the surrendring of the Fort to the Portugueses, and he would give them the Galleon he had spar’d, to carry them and their Effects, wheresoever they should think fit. The Portugueses taking Courage, Dutch and Ternates joyn and burn a Town. where others would be dismay’d, answer’d, That the Loss of the Galleons had not daunted them; for they would rather dye all of them, than deliver up the Fort. The Dutch durst not batter it alone, but resolv’d to joyn the King of Ternate, who was already set out with abundance of Carcoas to that Effect. They met him a League from the Fort, and spending little [234]Time in Ceremonies return’d together, burning a Town of Tydore by the Way, came the next Morning before the Fort.

They landed 800 Dutch and Ternate Soldiers, and having made a Trench with Barrels fill’d with Earth, batter’d the Fort for three Days from that Work, with two Pieces of Cannon. At the same Time they play’d upon it from their Ships, firing above 1500 Shot. The third Day they Batter the Fort and are repuls’d. drew nearer; and the fourth in the Morning began to batter more furiously. They kill’d the Constable of the Castle, and in the midst of the Confusion, the King of Ternate and the Dutch, that were ashore, advanc’d, drawing the Cannon under the very Fort, having surpriz’d the Portugueses, and falling on them unexpectedly. They soon recovering themselves, attack’d the Dutch afresh, who turning their Backs, behav’d themselves so basely, that they ran into the Water; abandoning the Guns they had ashore. In the Height of this Success, many Dutch being slain, and only four Portugueses, on a sudden they spy’d all the Fort in a Flame, which roar’d from The Fort Burnt. the Ground to the Tops of the Houses, till a considerable Part was blown up, and almost all the rest consum’d, and lay’d flat. Six and twenty Portugueses were burnt, and it could never be discover’d or guess’d, how, or which Way the Powder was set a fire, to cause that mighty Destruction. The Portugueses, who just before were joyful for their Victory, having no Walls to shelter them, were forc’d to retire to the City of Tydore, and the Dutch and Ternates rallying, pursu’d them thither. The King receiv’d them in friendly Manner, and he himself went the same Day Tydore taken by the Dutch. aboard the Dutch Ship that lay at Anchor before it, and calling the Dutch Admiral, propos’d to him the Affair of the Fort, and that if those who defended it had ships allow’d them, they would go away to other Parts. He agreed to it, and though it cost the Portugueses all they had, they accepted of three small Tenders, a Galliot that had been the King’s, and a Dutch Tender to secure them against the Ternates. The Dutch settled Amity with the King of Tydore; that they should continue in his Dominions; and erect Factories, and Trade for Clove, as the Portugueses had done. Thus the Conquer’d having bought some Ships dispers’d themselves about those Islands. Many of them went to the Philippines, where Don Pedro, the Governour, examin’d them, in order to get Information concerning the Moluccos.

Antony de Silva, a Portuguese, was one of them that escap’d from the Dutch design to take the Ships of the Philippines. Fort of Ternate, and came to the Town of Arevalo in the Philippines; Besides being a Soldier, he was also a Naguatato, or Interpreter. This Man gave an Authentick Relation of that Affair, and added, That being brought Prisoner from Amboyna, the Dutch Admiral having a Sea-Chart before him, look’d for Mindoro, Manila, and for Cabite; and being ask’d by Silva, why he look’d for it, was inform’d, That his Design was, in Case he did not succeed at the Moluccos, to try to take some of the Ships that trade betwixt New Spain, and the Philippines. Silva reply’d, That Silva gives Intelligence of it. he had not the Time to meet either; because those that come to the Philippines arrive about the 10th of May, and the others set out on the 10th of June. However that was the Design of the Dutch Admiral, who intended to get Intelligence at Mindoro, thence to sail to Macao, send an Embassador into China, and revenge the Wrong Don Pablos de Portugal had done [235]them in those Countries. Then to load Pepper at Patane; next at the Streight of Sincapura, to endeavour to take the Chinese Ships that resort to Malaca; and whatever happen’d, to hold on his Voyage to Holland that Way, loaden with Treasure. All this the Dutch Admiral communicated to Antony de Silva, as to one that was to go with him into Holland, because he was a Soldier, and able Interpreter in both Languages; and therefore Stephen Drage made much of him. This Intelligence was confirm’d All the Moluccos lost to Spain. by some others, who had fought and escap’d the Slaughter at Tydore. Don Pedro hearing so much, was concern’d, as a Man zealous for the Church, and for his King; and it griev’d him to consider, that the Crown of Spain had not a Foot of Land left it in the Moluccos; and that a Rebel was in quiet Possession of them all.

Prosperity having embolden’d, and strengthen’d the Dutch, Don Pedro Don Pedro’s Precautions. assembling his Council of War, order’d that the Captains Antony Freyle, Commander of the Squadron belonging to the Pintados, Peter Sevil, Stephen de Alcazar, and Bernardine Alfonso, should repair to the Forts of the Pintados, and other Islands that were in Danger, with their Companies. He refitted the Ships, and prepar’d his Cannon, as being so near a victorious Enemy, who so successfully put in Execution all their Threats. Antony Dutch Letters and Present to the King of Ternate. de Sylva show’d an Original Letter, written by another Dutch Admiral at the Island of Borneo, to the King of Ternate, and sent by Philip Bissegop, Captain of a Ship, with a Present of a Quantity of fine Holland; Six Bales of several Vessels with Musk; Twelve Bottles of Rose-Water; Six Pounds of Dutch Anfion, that is, Opium, which, as has been said, disturbs the Senses, and is us’d by those People to encourage them to fight; and six Barrels of Powder. He gave him an Account of Andrew Furtado’s unfortunate Voyage, the Obstacles, Storms, and Enemies he had met with, since his Departure from Ternate, till he came to Malaca. He gave him the Title of Most Serene Prince, and Potent King of the Moluccos, Bandas, Amboyna, and innumerable other Islands. He congratulated with him for the Event of his Arrival at the Moluccos; promising he would return to Ternate with a greater Power, he expected from Holland, and take Possession of the Forts, to extirpate the common Enemy, the King of Spain; and encourag’d him with these Hopes, to hold out till then. He assur’d him, that he should scour all those Seas from the Moluccos, and extend his Dominions as far as China, without being hinder’d by the Philippines or Japoneses. To this End, he desired him to renew his Friendship with Mindanao, and to acquaint the King of those Islands, that he was a Friend to the Dutch, so to give them Admittance to those Ports, Freedom of Trade, and amicable Entertainment, as was requisite for their Undertakings; this being a Thing most Expedient, above all other Politick Considerations. He added, he might observe, and be assur’d, that nothing was so little regarded in Spain, as to contrive that their many Provinces should preserve some Sort of Union. That therefore all those which are very remote, and subject to that Crown, ought to take much Notice of the great Delays there, in coming to a Resolution, and sending Succours from Spain; because before they believe, or examine the News brought them in order to believe them, Affairs have taken a new Turn, and consequently neither the Spanish Councils, nor their Arms come seasonably. That Experience [236]had made most of these Things known to his Highness, and his Zeal for his Service oblig’d him to mention them. Antony de Silva, added, that he was very sure the King of Ternate had not omitted doing any Thing of what the Dutch Man recommended to him; and that he had already propos’d to his People to go abroad to fight, far from their own Islands. Tho’ it was never apprehended he would do so, yet at that Time it much troubled Don Pedro, because he was so spent with the Affair of the Sangleyes, the Want of whom he labour’d so to supply, that no such Mischief might happen again, it being so necessary to support the Trade of the Philippines another Way, and procure safety at Home in Order to make War, and keep up a Reputation.

Time, which sometimes gives Hope, and sometimes Dispair, comforted Don Pedro in his Affliction, bringing in a few Months after some Ships of private Persons from New Spain, and then in due Season the usual Fleet. Men, Money, &c. arrive at Manila from New Spain. They arriv’d at Manila, on the Eve of S. Matthias, and in them the Spaniards sent from Spain, for the Expedition of Ternate, with above 200 more from the Marquess de Montesclaros, Viceroy of New Spain, as also the other Necessaries, and Money, pursuant to the King’s Order. Part of this came committed to Brother Gaspar Gomez, who was receiv’d with incredible Joy. He deliver’d all his Letters to the Governour, and immediate Care was taken to quarter the Officers and Soldiers, and to distribute them speedily, so that all Men might believe there was no other Design in their coming, but the Security of the Philippine Islands, threatned by the Emperor of Japan, and the Conspiracies of the Sangleyes. This Report was industriously so given out, that it might fly and spread abroad Management of the Governour. without the Kingdom, lest they might receive any Intelligence, who had cause to fear. Besides that, as the Fame of those great Preparations was Advantageous to the Spaniards in Point of Reputation, so the Reality of the Power they had, added to the Opinion conceiv’d, prov’d the Defence and Security of them all. In Japan, only the News that Manila was full of Men, and Ships of War, allay’d, or quite banish’d the Disgust of that King, on Account of Don Pedro’s refusing him Ship-Wrights. The People of Chincheo also forbore meditating Revenge against an Enemy, whose Victories were back’d with such Succours. Don Pedro consider’d all these Particulars, and each of them made him conclude, that he might with Safety be absent for some Time from Manila. However the King of Ternate overjoy’d that he had shaken off the Spanish Yoke, made little Account of all that was told him, concerning its Neighbouring Kingdoms, believing they would never recover their Ancient Possessions. The Dutch Commanders, who were rebuilding the burnt Fort at Tydore, sent him a considerable Number of Heavy Brass Cannon, of Drakes, and Muskets, and he hired some of the Ingeniers, that came in those Ships, to look to his Fortifications, and reside in them, and in his City. Some accepted of the Habitation, approving of that disorderly, and irreligious Liberty of Life allow’d in that Country; where considering the frequent Resort of Ships from the North, and the many Factories, they reckon’d themselves as good as at Home, since they could often meet with their Kindred or Friends, or at least with their Country-Men. Banish’d Spaniards and Portugueses arriv’d daily at the Port of Oton, in the Philippine Islands, and [237]among them Paul de Lima, a Person of great Experience, and still General of the Artillery at Tydore, who, besides the News of the late Destruction, brought an Account of the Joy wherewith the Dutch dug up the Guns he endeavour’d to hide, and how much they were increased in Strength and Shipping. He was receiv’d with much Honour, in regard to his Quality, and because he was one of those who had lost Lands and Goods, taken from him by the King of Ternate, and his Information, and Counsel were of Use for what afterwards happen’d. All Men attended the Warlike Preparations, in their several Stations, but with equal Zeal; building Ships, and gathering Provisions, Arms, and Ammunitions; and Don Pedro himself was so diligent and vigilant, that he attended the meanest Employments, giving an Example, and encouraging; so that it may be said, he did every Thing, for he ply’d all Hands.

The End of the Ninth Book.



