---
heading: Book 3
linkTitle: Book 3
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


Cessation of Arms.

Both Sides now took the Breathing of a short Cessation; advantagious to Ternate for the Liberty of Trade, and to the Portugueses, because it gain’d Time to their Hope of Relief, which they concluded must be near at Hand, by Reason it had been long expected. They were not discouraged by Events, those having prov’d alternatively Successful and Unfortunate, and Victory was toss’d to and fro; besides that the Interruption of Commerce had knit some the closer together in Friendship. 

I could mention several Instances of this Sort, contain’d in Letters, and other Spanish and Portuguese Relations, sent by Religious Men from the Moluccos, to the Governours of the Philippine Islands, whose Papers have, upon this Occasion, been lay’d before me, for my better Information, for which Reason we may make Use of some of them, without departing from the main Subject.

The gravest of the Greek and Latin Historians sometimes intermix private Adventures, as it were short Episodes to divert the Reader. The Example of great Masters is a sufficient Authority for Learners, for which Reason I may well be allow’d this Freedom.

One Duarte, a brave Ensign, had contracted strict Friendship with Cachil A Love Story. Tudura, which was no way obstructed by the Difficulties of the Seige, nor so much as interrupted. Duarte was wont in the dead of the Night, to go safely into the City in the Habit of the Country, and by the Help of the Language, being Master of it, where he was privately admitted into his Friend’s House, and well receiv’d there on another Account by Tudurisa, [62]his only Daughter, who, being prevail’d on by the Love she bore Duarte, imbrac’d the Christian Religion. The Father was not unacquainted with their Love, but he also knew that it was attended by Modesty in Tudurisa, and true Courtesy in Duarte.

Returning to the Fort, he used to be taken in the same dangerous way, by those Persons who had let him down with a Rope. He brought with him some Intelligence and Provisions; but he came not so entire himself, for the Indian Woman, who was to be his Wife, had robb’d him of his Heart. Nuno Pereyra going the Rounds miss’d the Ensign at his Post, and enquiring into it, understood the Cause of his Absence; in Respect to which, considering the mighty Power it often has over great Souls, he conniv’d at the Breach of Martial Discipline, assigning that to the Passion, without reproving the Lover. Whether he follow’d the Example we read of Quintus Fabius Maximus, in the like Case, or on Account that Experience shows, there is Nothing can hold a Lover so fast as the Presence of the lov’d Object; Pereyra enjoining all Persons to keep the Secret, contriv’d, without offending Tudura, that his Daughter should come privately into the Fort, which she consented to, without many Perswasions. Having so done, the Commander in Chief, calling his Ensign, said to him, I am inform’d, that at certain Times, and that when the Danger is greatest, you forsake us; but that it is not for want of Affection, or not knowing the Duty of your Post; tho’ we were not confin’d to these narrow Walls, I would not punish your Failure, because Mildness has ever been more efficacious for correcting of Generous Souls, than Rigour. It will not be convenient for the Future, that we be left without you, and in Fear for what may befall you: Here is your Wife, and then she appear’d, brought hither without any Force, or Opposition from her Father.

Take her to you lovingly, and do not suffer the Honour of Portugal, depending on these few Men, to want the Bravery of so able an Officer. Duarte was amaz’d, generously out of Countenance, full of Love, and knew not what to say; but was excus’d by his Friends, and even by Nunno Pereyra.

Hopes and Despair of the Besieged. 

It was now the Year 1575, when the Besieged began to conceive some Hopes of their Deliverance; because the Saugiacks and Cachils of the King of Ternate’s Race were divided into Factions, and there wanted not some among them, who endeavour’d to draw the Portugueses over to their Party. These Misunderstandings made them act less vigorously; and did not they look on theirs as the Common Cause, the Design had succeeded. 

The Portugueses in this Condition, despairing of all Relief, the Natives of Ternate on the other Side of the Island, next those of the Meaos, discover’d a Galeon coming from Malaca, having coasted about Borneo; they concluded it was that which brought the Succours from Portugal, and being assur’d it was so, they became unanimous again, and press’d on the Seige; but Force little prevailing against the Resolution of Proposals of Accommodation, and Reasons for it. the Besieged, Cachil Tulo, by Permission, propos’d some Terms, which the Commander in Chief had long listen’d to from the Wall. One Day making several Overtures, Tulo told him, That the King, his Brother, was willing to put an End to that tedious Seige, upon any Conditions. That to this Effect had concluded a Peace with the King of Tydore, that he might not relieve them for the Future. That the King of Bachian had [63]joyn’d him for the same Purpose; to the End, that since they were all convinc’d that was their common Cause, they might with their joynt Power make their utmost Efforts. 

That the Cessation which had lasted till then, tho’ advantages to the King, as encouraging the Trade with the Javaneses, and Rumes, who came to Load Clove, must of Necessity cease. He ask’d how long they would expose their Lives to the utmost Dangers, only to gain an empty Name of Loyal Subjects, which, perhaps, would never be known to him that was to reward it. He bid them consider the Villany of his Father, King Aerio’s Death, and that by their Obstinate holding out they made the Murderers Cause more Criminal. That they thus show’d they approv’d of anothers Treachery, whose Punishment they would compass by other Means. That they ought to be very thankfull, that the King would not involve them in the Guilt of that Wretch, who contrary to his solemn Oath, to the Laws of Friendship, and the Honour of the Portuguese Nation, or rather to Nature it self, had Murder’d that King, who most inviolably observ’d the Faith he had engag’d to him. Besides, that they were sensible how little Comfort uncertain Hopes could afford amidst real Wants; and how impracticable it was for Relief to come from so great a distance, through such boisterous Seas, causing so many Shipwrecks, and which seem’d to have conspir’d against those who had oppress’d and injur’d Ternate.

He concluded his Discourse requiring the Commander in Chief, to deliver up the Fort, or expect the utmost Rigour; for if he once refus’d the Terms offer’d, and provok’d them, they would spare neither Sex, nor Age. The Besieg’d were not free from Jealousie, that there was Fraud in these Offers; The Besieged Surrender. yet, perceiving that the Succours never came from India, either because retarded by the African War, in which King Sebastian had engag’d himself, or by the Difficulties of that dangerous Voyage; and believing that the two Kings of Tydore and Ternate were reconcil’d, as Tulo told them, thinking he of Tydore, without whose support they could not subsist, had forsaken their Friendship, the Proposals were accepted by unanimous Consent, after Nuno Pereyra had return’d a resolute Answer, suitable to that Part of Cachil Tulo’s Words, which contain’d any Threats, signifying to him, how little they mov’d himself, or his Men; and that he would hearken to no Conditions to the disservice of his God, or his King, or to disparage the Bravery of his Soldiers, which had been so often try’d to the cost of the Natives of Ternate; nevertheless upon some other Considerations, he would The Capitulation. surrender the Fort, provided that all the Portugueses might march out in a Body, Colours Flying, with their Wives, Children, Slaves, and all their Goods, having first Hostages given them to their content, that no Harm, or Injury should be done them. That the King should secure them their Passage to Amboyna, and find them Vessels; and that such as should happen to be left in Dominions for want of them, should have no Ransome demanded of them, either then, or at the time of their departure.

That the Fort and Guns should be deliver’d to King Babu, upon express Condition, That he should hold it for the King of Portugal, and in his Name, to whom he should restore it, whensoever he effectually punish’d the Murder of King Aerio. The King easily Granted, and Swore to perform all those Conditions, being eager to possess himself of the Fort, before the Succours arriv’d, The Fort Deliver’d. which were now near at hand. On the Day appointed, which was Saint [64]Stephen’s, the Ternates took up all the advantageous Posts to view the Portugueses, who march’d out as if they had been Conquerors; and no sooner were they out of the Fort, than the Natives running in, possess’d themselves of the Guns, with loud Laughter and Shouts, Scoffing at those that left it; for the third Day after the Galeon arriv’d, well Mann’d, and furnish’d with Guns, and all Necessaries, and James de Azambuja in it, as Commander in Chief. They had thoughts of Recovering the Fort, but it was too late, because the Enemy was possess’d of all Things, without any Opposition.

Pereyra then perceiv’d how great an Obstacle Precipitation is to the chusing of the safest Advice, and how infallibly it is follow’d by fruitless Repentance; since had he delay’d but never so little longer, tho’ it were only to weigh the Enemies Proposals, who ought never to be suppos’d Sincere, he might have sav’d himself and Destroy’d them. For this Reason, tho’ he wanted not an honourable Excuse, he resolv’d not to return to Goa, having private Intelligence that the Viceroy would not fail to secure him, in Order to cut off his Head. Azambuja protected him in his Galeon, and he went over with many others to Amboyna. The rest spread themselves throughout the Neighbouring Islands, in Vessels they begg’d. Some return’d to Malaca, and only sixteen Portuguese Families remain’d in Ternate for want of Shipping; who at first submitted to the change of their Fortune: but could not afterwards comply with the Difference there is betwixt Domination and Servitude. The King of Tydore a Portugueses settle at Tydore. most trusty Friend to the Spaniards in their greatest Affliction, offer’d them his Islands, Houses, and Trade of Spice. He sent them a good Number of Carcoas, which carry’d them over to his Dominions, and soon after assign’d them a convenient Place to build their Houses and Churches. This Colony was increased, and the Number of its Inhabitants augmented by Sancho de Vasconselos, who sent others from Malaca, being Commander in Chief of Goa and afterwards of Amboyna, in the Year 1578. At last he came thither himself, and erected a Fort, a quarter of a League from the City of Tydore, which gives its Name to the Island.

Tydore describ’d. Tydore, in the Language of those Parts, which was formerly spoken, signifies, Fertility and Beauty. Europeans generally give it this Name; but its King, as appears by his Arabick and Persian Subscriptions, Writes Tudura, and not Tydore. It is not inferior to Ternate for Fruitfulness, and Delight, but far exceeds it in Magnitude and Populousness; and yields the same Aromatick Product. Curious Persons have there try’d to improve the Clove, watering and pruning the Tree at proper Seasons, and it appears to embrace the Helps of Art, by growing bigger, more active in its Vertue, and the Scent stronger. The white Sanders here come to more Perfection, than in any other of the Eastern Parts. In this, as well as the other Molucco Islands are found those Birds, they, in their Language, call Birds of Paradice. Manucodiatas, signifying Birds of Paradise, from a Fable, credited by those superstitious People, that they came down from Heaven. The Fort here was afterwards enlarg’d by Nuno Pereyra, not far from the Port, and then by James de Azambuja. 

The latter did not only contribute with his Industry, Fort of Tydore. but with his Labour, carrying the Materials himself, when it was requisite to set the Soldiers an Example, and forward the Work; which the King often view’d, and was well pleas’d to see the Fortifications. He [65]discours’d familiarly with the Officers, advis’d with them in his Wars, and comforted the Christians, and they far’d best, for from that Time forward, there being none in Ternate, and that Fort in the Hands of the Natives, the Heathens and Mahometans seem’d to be Superior and Conquerors throughout all those Provinces. 

They strengthen’d themselves with Works and other Preparations, erected Forts on high Places, and bending their Minds against the Christians, put many to cruel Martyrdoms; that so the Foundation of our Faith may be in all Parts cemented with the Blood of the Faithful. They dismember’d the Bodies, and burnt the Legs Persecution. and Arms in the sight of the still Living Trunks. They impal’d the Women, tore out their Bowels, and they surving themselves, beheld their still moving Flesh in the Hands of their Executioners. Children were pull’d Piecemeal before their Mothers Eyes, and Infants still in Embrio were rent from their Wombs. It has been made out, that above 60000 Christians fell by the Sword in only the King of Ternate’s Dominions. This is asserted in the Annual Relations of the Fathers of the Society, who preach’d in those Parts. They give an Account of this dismal Persecution, with all the Circumstances of the Cruelties; as how the persecuted Persons fled to the Mountains, seeking for Compassion among the wild Beasts, others cast themselves into the Sea, where they perish’d, either devour’d by its Monsters, or swallow’d by the Waves themselves, not being able to reach the other Islands. A considerable Number of these religious Fugitives, as they swam met a Portuguese Ship, coming to the Relief of those at Amboyna, and with dismal Voices cry’d out, Help, Relieve us, for we are Christians. 

They carefully took them up in their Boats, and having view’d them at Leasure, found that none of them were above 12 Years of Age. Yet at this same Time, when cruelty advanc’d God’s Glory, Providence seem’d to act Counter in the very Cities, and Deserts. Idolaters and Mahometans were converted, and our Religious Men preach’d and catechis’d, without any Fear of Punishment, which they rather coveted, and thought themselves unworthy of it; encouraging one another with the Examples the Tyrant made, for several Purposes. But all those People looking upon it as their Duty to seek Revenge, their Cruelty gaining Applause under that Name, and Europe being involv’d in Dismal Troubles, they met with no Opposition in the Execution of their Vengeance, and the Calamity ran so high, that in the space of thirty Years, they either quite obliterated, or much obscured the Name of Christianity in those Eastern Parts, destroy’d our Churches, and, like those who prepare to hunt wild Beasts, arm’d themselves against the Faithful who liv’d in more security among those savage Creatures, or in Deserts never penetrated by Men, feeding on Herbs, and gaining Time, by that lawful Retreat for the sake of the Gospel, for the Wrath of Heav’n, whose Executioners those Men were, to pass over. Above 36 Towns, of each 800 Inhabitants in Gilolo and Celebes a spacious and populous Country, and in those of the two Kings of Sian and Sanguil, Many Apostatize. who profess’d Christianity, with most of their Subjects, in the Kingdom of Cauripana; in that of Bachian, whose King and his People were Sons of the Church; in the Islands of Amboyna, where Forty Towns worshipped CHRIST, in the Bosom of his Faith, and in those of Tydore, which were [66]not without this Light; in all those Places they fell off from Christianity, and were utterly lost; first through the Insolency of the Portuguese Commanders, and lastly on Account of the Death of Sultan Aerio; who, as was prov’d, had given no real, nor so much as a likely Token of Falshood, for which they might be provok’d to destroy him. However the Christians dy’d with such Resolution, that the Persecuters took not away any Life but what became a fresh Example of Magnanimity, and perhaps Providence might permit that Accident of Aerio, with a Design to advance the Churches Glory.

Augustin Nunez sent to Command at Amboyna. Sultan Babu making his present Victory an Instrument to obtain others, Ship’d his Men, in Order to besiege Tydore and Bachian; and tho’ he met with a vigorous Defence in both Places, and the Portuguese Auxiliaries made some Amends for his Superiority of Power, yet they submitted to the Tyrant. This Revenge made him stick at no Cruelty. In November, this same Year, a Galeon came to Malaca from India, to carry Succours for the Moluccos, commanded by Captain Augustin Nunez, the Eldest and Bravest Commander in those Days, as he made it appear in the Expedition of Chaul, when it was besieged by Niza Molucco, when Don Luys de Atayde was Viceroy of India, in the year 1578. The Galeon was stor’d with all Necessaries, and in it James James Lopez de Mezquita sent Prisoner to Ternate. Lopez de Mezquita, the Murderer of Aerio, design’d for Punishment, in Satisfaction for the Wrong done. He was so strong, and fierce, that to secure him, he was fetter’d with a great Chain, the End whereof was made fast to a heavy Piece of Brass Cannon. Augustin Nunez had Orders to convey him to the new King of Ternate, to be deliver’d to him bolted, like a Criminal, that he might pass such a sentence of Death on him as he thought fit, which should be executed in his Presence, pursuant to the Orders sent by the King of Portugal. They put him on double Fetters, Manacles, and Chains, and kept him in the Steeridge. Augustin Nunez went to succeed Sancho de Vasconcelos, in the Fort of Amboyna; but a storm rising, he was forc’d into the Port of Japara, of Sunda, in the greater Java. The Galeon wanting water, and Refreshment, he there sent for it; which the Native Javaneses brought him in 40 Vessels. 

Among them came 150 Soldiers in the Habit of Peasants, and Fishermen; who making many words as is usual among Buyers and Sellers, drew the Ponyards they brought conceal’d, and surprizing the Portugueses, fell on with such Fury and Cruelty, that they The Murderer kill’d. kill’d them all. Among them dy’d James Lopez de Mezquita, but fighting with extraordinary Bravery, tho’ held by his Chain, hinder’d by his Fetters, and other heavy Encumbrances, and restrain’d by the Cannon, to which his Chain was made fast. However he got a Sword and a Buckler wherewith he cut down ten Javaneses, revenging on them the Death of the Portugueses, and they on him, that of King Aerio of Ternate, which had occasion’d so much Slaughter. Seventy three Christians were kill’d and above the same Number of Javaneses, and their Vessels had been taken, but that others came to their Assistance from the Shore in the Heat of the Action, in which there were Men with Fire-Locks and Lances, six Yards and a Quarter long, the Points of them poison’d. The Galeon was taken without any Succour, nor was the Cannon of any Use.

It is but reasonable that so manly and honourable a Death should, as is [67]usual, render all this Gentlemans Life honourable; and that his Fetters, and Sufferings joyn’d to it, excite Compassion and Affection in the minds of the His Vindication. Readers, so to blot out the Hatred they have conceiv’d against him on Account of Sultan Aerio’s Death. It is to be observ’d, for his justification that it does not appear, not is it reported, he was incens’d to perform that Act through Interest, Ambition, or any other private Motives; but was mov’d to it by Informations which perswaded him it was convenient, for the Establishing and Advancement of Religion, and the publick Peace. Very brave men must also be allow’d some Excesses of Fierceness, which proceed from an extraordinary Force in the irascible Part of the mind, and wherein Valour is subdu’d. When these Persons find themselves encompass’d by great Numbers, and streightned by wrongful Violence; if they are not to be daunted and overcome, it comes to pass that Patience often provok’d turns that Courage into Fury and Rage, which causes them to make mighty Slaughters, and Examples of Cruelty; led to it not only by Passion, but also by Judgment and Thought, which directs them to cause themselves to be dreaded even to Astonishment, to save themselves and their People from other great Cruelties which usually mean Souls attempt and practice upon those they stand much in Fear of. Let this Reflection serve for a general Excuse to other Offences of this sort mention’d, or blam’d in our History.

This Accident, in as much as related to the Death of James Lopez de Mezquita, was forgot, or at least not known for many Years, for in 1603 the King of Ternate demanded Justice of our King, against that Man not knowing that God had summon’d him before a more upright Tribunal. 

The News being brought to Malaca, the Commander Arias de Saldana immediately Peter Lopez de Sousa sent to Moluccos sent away another Galeon S. Peter and S. Paul, for the Moluccos under command of Peter Lopez de Sousa, and a Galley with 150 Soldiers to relieve Sancho de Vasconcelos at Amboyna, where he wanted Provisions, and was streightned. 

They sailed in May 1579, to touch at Borneo, there to take in all Necessaries for the Design.

He arriv’d on that Island in June, and found it in an Uproar, occasion’d by the Spaniards Spaniards at Borneo.

who came thither with Doctor Sandi, Governour of the Philippine Islands in 30 rowing Vessels. 

He took the City, and put the King to flight, who was a Lover of the Portugueses, and from that time Manila began to be look’d upon as a place of Arms, for the recovering of the Molucco Islands.

If Sandi had then employ’d those, he carry’d to this other Expedition against them, he would have found the Tyrant less settled, and consequently his Revenge more easy. 

Vasconcelos died at Amboyna, and James de Azambuja succeeded him, so that nothing came now from India but fair Promises.

In the Philippine Islands they had no Orders at that Time to intermeddle in those Wars, because they then belong’d to another Sovereign, and therefore they were only Lookers on to those Martyrdoms, and Revolutions and employ’d themselves as they us’d in Camboxa, Mindanao, Japan and China, and then particularly in Borneo, without regarding those other Successes.

Borneo lies between Malaca and the Moluccos, and according to the Opinion Borneo describ’d. of Gerard Mercator, is that which Ptolomy calls, the Island of Good Fortune. A Point of it lies under the Equinoctial, and the greater Part stretches out to 6 Degrees of North Latitude, taking up the two first Parallels. Thus it appears to be above 400 Leagues in Compass. It abounds [68]in Provisions, and all other Necessaries for the Support of humane Life. And produces abundance of Camphire, Agarick Diamonds, vast Numbers of Horses, smaller than the Spanish; but it has not such plenty of Sheep, or Kine: 

There is a general Resort of Trade in all its Populous Cities and Ports. The Capital is Borneo, which gives Name to the Island, built on a Spacious Lake the Sea Forms, like Venice, and said to contain 23000 Houses: The King is a Mahometan; no man speaks to him but by the Interposition of an Interpreter. The Natives worship Idols. They are White, good Natur’d and sharp Witted. They have no certain Fashion of Cloaths. Many of them wear Cotton Shirts, and others of white common single Tabby, with red Lists.

Sirelela, Brother to this King, came to Manila, where Doctor Sandi being then Governour, he laid before him his Pretensions, and some Means he had for bringing his Designs to bear; but he put the main Stress upon King of Borneo’s Brothers at Manila. his having a greater Party there, than the King his Brother. He promised which would be no difficult Matter, in Regard of the Hatred the People bore the King, that he would make the Kingdom Tributary to the Kings of Spain. 

The Governour having taken sufficient Precautions, condescended to his Request, and arming as many Spaniards, and Philippines as he thought convenient, with all Necessaries for a great Enterprize, ship’d them, and arriv’d happily at Borneo. 

He attack’d it in several Places; the best of the People immediately declar’d for the Brother. 

The King thinking himself weakest at Sea, reserv’d his Forces for the Land, and being deceiv’d Spaniards overthrow that King. in his Expectation, was forc’d to fly, his Army being routed, without any Remains to attend him in the Deserts, and Retreats of the Mountains, where he liv’d miserably. 

Sirelela ascended the Throne; the Victorious Spaniards return’d to the Philippine Islands loaded with Booty; and among other Things, if we may believe Relations, brought 600 Pieces of Artillery. 

However the depos’d King, a few Months after, got to a Head again. No Man ought to Despair in Adversity, for Fortune is nothing but the Will of God. 

Thus the King, with the Assistance of the Portuguses, He is restored. recover’d his Throne, casting down his Brother, and defeating him, till he was utterly destroy’d. Hatred is frequently no less intense than Love among those whom Nature has most closly link’d. In the Molucco Islands the War did not cease, nor the general Malice against Christians.

The News of what had happened there was not known in Europe, where, and in Africk greater Dangers were apprehended; of the Event whereof A Prodigy. Providence thought fit to inform our free Wills, by stupendious Prodigies.

On June 15, 1580, about the declining of the Day, there appear’d to certain Sailers a Large Crucifix in the Body of the Sun the Foot of the Cross standing on Mount Calvary, as we see in common Pictures; on the Right Side of it a Figure clad in White, and another on the left in a deep Red. The Crucifix ascended upwards, and was still seen to mount till the Sun Setting, the Day shut in.

This was seen by all those who came in a Caravel, from the Island of St. Michael ten Leagues before they came to that of St. George, the Bishop whereof residing in that of Angla, sent the Affidavit of it to King Philip the Second, which was receiv’d and much talked of by the Judge Freytas, a grave Person. All the Men of the Caravel sign’d it, as Eye-Witnesses, who affirm, That being touch’d with it, [69]they confess’d their Sins at the Sight of the Prodigy, begging Mercy with Sighs and Tears.

Our Understandings ought to stand amaz’d, and praise, him that produces both what is Natural, and Miraculous, and who by so many Warnings shows us, that he has reserv’d Times, and Moments in his own Hand.

King Sebastian, at that Time, had other Conquests in View. 

The Loss or the Recovery of Ternate and the neighbouring Moluccos concern’d him alone; but he referr’d that to the Governour of India; whilst he himself, solicited by the Xerif Muley Mahomet, whom he design’d to set upon the King Sebastian prepares for the War in Africk. Throne of Morocco, tho’ with a good Design, joyn’d the African Army, with another of Catholicks, consisting of the Portuguese Gentry, of Spaniards, Italians, and Germans. And, if we may believe those who committed that Expedition to writing, he went over into Africk, contrary to all the known Rules and Maxims of Martial Prudence, which Proportions the Strength to the Undertaking, to ascertain the Success and forecasts, in Case Things prosper, to secure and preserve them. This he did upon the Assurances the Xerif gave him, that as soon as ever the Portuguese Forces appear’d, the People would submit to him. But God permitted that most Christian Prince Is Kill’d there. to be kill’d, the Xerif perishing with him; and their Armies to be routed, Muley Moluc the third Person remaining Victorious, tho’ he also dy’d in the same Battel, and was bury’d in triumphant Manner. The Prodigies, and Fears of the wiser sort were verify’d in the King of Portugal, and particularly that which happen’d before his Birth. 

The Princess Joanna his Mother, one Night saw a great Number of Moors come into her Chamber, in the Palace at Lisbon, clad in several Colours; Prodigy. she believ’d or fancy’d they might be those they call Monetros, who are such as do the Duty of Guards in the Royal Apartment. Some went out to enquire, and found them all still, as husht as at other Times.

The Princess seeing the imaginary Moors come in again, swoon’d away in her Ladies Arms. Afterwards at the proper Time, she was deliver’d of King Sebastian, whose singular Virtues, supported by the Loyalty of his Subjects, might have shin’d as bright as his natural Magnanimity, had not that hasten’d his End. That was mourn’d for and lamented by all Christendom, and brought Trouble to all its Princes, who began seriously to discourse about the Successor to the Crown of Portugal.

There they presently swore Henry the Cardinal King. Henry, the Prince Cardinal, Unkle to the late King, then Eighty Years of Age, and the last Lawful Male of that Royal House, which began in another of his Name. Antony, Prior of Crato, Son to Prince Lewis, pretended to succeed him, and tho’ declar’d illegitimate, there was a Party that follow’d him. 

This Revolution, and the Hurry in such difficult Exigences, were the Occasion, that Care was not taken to supply other Places, much nearer than Ternate. Besides that dismal Accounts brought 5000 Leagues, tho’ they were represented by Demosthenes, would come cold from his Mouth and scarce move the best dispos’d Prince, when never so much at Leasure; and King Henry, had no Power, but only his Zeal for Religion, to oppose the Tyranny practis’d in the Archipelago of the Moluccos.

The Cardinal King thought all his Forces little enough, and necessary considering the extraordinary Jealousie he had conceiv’d, upon our King Philip’s declaring himself a Pretender to those Kingdoms, and having order’d a considerable [70]Army to make up to the frontiers, which he had drawn together during the said Cardinal’s Life. The Generals were the Duke of Alva, and the Marquess de Santa Cruz, the first at Land, the other at Sea; and in the mean while the ablest Divines and Civilians of Europe, in all the Schools, and Parliaments writ concerning his Right.

