---
heading: Book 2
linkTitle: Book 2
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


The Confederates meet. 

The People of Ternate, Tydore, Bachian, and all the Neighbouring Princes, being impatient to put in Execution their desperate Design, chose the King of Tydore for their Head, to joyn with him of Ternate, that had been expell’d on account of the Death of Gonzalo Pereyra. Among the Relations usually collected by the Christian Curiosity of the Religious Men of the Society, we find that these Kings met in the little Island, which divides Ternate from Tydore, before they went each of them to his proper Post for performing what was stipulated in the Confederacy, and there the King of [41]Tydore, as Chief of the League, spoke to them in this Manner. I cannot mention the Occasion of this our Union, without shedding Tears, for the Joy King of Tydore’s Speech. of the Success, which we look upon as present, produces the same Effects it would do, were we already Victorious. Our Forces are assembled to deliver us from the Spanish Yoke, punishing those Men with the Hazard of our Total Ruin, whom neither our Benefits could oblige, nor our Threats correct. They are the great Robbers of the World, who usurp it, by shrowding their Avarice under specious and godly Pretences. In vain have we endeavour’d to moderate their Pride by Means of our Modesty and Submission. If they meet with Wealthy Enemies, the Portugeses show themselves Covetous, if with Needy, they are Ambitious; this is the only Nation that equally seeks after others Wealth and Miseries. They rob, kill, and subdue, taking away our Dominions under false Titles, and think they have no settled Peace, till they have reduc’d the Provinces into Desarts. 

We possess the most fruitful Islands in Asia, only to purchase Servitude and base Subjection with their Product, converting this blessed Bounty of Heaven into Tribute paid to the Ambition of Intruding Tyrants. Experience has show’d us, how odious our Valour has been to the Christian Commanders, whom, for the same Reason, we must never hope to find more modest, or less our Enemies. Assure your selves then, and remember, both Kings and Subjects, both you who seek Glory, and you who provide for your Safety, that neither of these is to be had without Liberty, nor this without War; nor is the War to be maintain’d without Courage and Unanimity. The Power of the Portugueses is increased, and on it their Reputation depends. Having then discover’d the Mystery, and Cause of this Tyranny, who is there that will not prepare to try the utmost of Fortune, to purchase the greatest of human Felicities, which is Liberty. Other Nations, which when they hear of our Resolution, will call it Despair and Savageness; if they weigh it with the Occasion, will rather Commend than go about to find Excuses for us. Besides, every Man knows what is fit for his Religion, his Honour and his Country, better than those who judge of these Things at a Distance. In short, What is Life worth without Liberty?

Those incensed Kings made suitable Returns to these Words, and having taken proper Measures to commence and carry on the War, went away in their Vessels, without losing Time, or admitting of Delay; as well knowing the many Dangers a great Undertaking is expos’d to, which depends on Secrecy, and is imparted to many.

On the Day appointed, all the Natives departed the City of Ternate, Ternate City abandon’d and burnt. with their Families, not in good Order, as in Transmigrations, but raging, in Confusion, and loaded with their Children, and a few Necessaries, having before sent away their Effects to other Islands. To convince the Portugueses of their Design, and that the People of Ternate abandon’d the Country, they set Fire to the City in several Places; the Flames began to take hold and spread, till they met, and of many small ones became one general Conflagration, with hideous Noise and Cries; for not only the Houses were burnt, which had for so many Ages belong’d to their Forefather, and Ancestors, but all that attracts the Affection to our Native Country, the Temples, all their worldly Treasure, and the Bounty of Nature; for the open Country began now to feel the Desolation, the Caves, [42]Lakes and Springs, the Rocks, and the very Sea it self shin’d, boil’d up and crack’d, and the Fire receiv’d into the subterraneous Caverns, lying in the hollow Mountains, pierced into the deepest Recesses, roaring and overturning Stones and Trees. In the mean while, the People travell’d towards the Desarts, looking back to view the Effects of their Revenge.

Resolution of the People. Tristan de Atayde, amaz’d to behold that dreadful Practice, having arm’d some Soldiers, sent Messages to The Queen and Governours, to propose some Accommodation, and appease that inhumane Rage. He promis’d to make Satisfaction, and that all Things should be set right, but it avail’d nothing; for they rather grew more furious, and would not hearken to any Proposal, or admit of Treaty, that might make them slacken in their Resolution. Being come to those Places which Nature has made strong among the Rocks, they arm’d, and in Parties fell upon the Christians, lying in wait for them when they went out for Wood or Water, and killing or wounding them by Surprize. The Edict was put in Execution throughout all the Islands at the same Time, destroying all the Portugueses that were in them. In the City Momoya, they kill’d eight that were with F. Portugueses slaughter’d. Francis Alvarez, but he fled to a Ship, after receiving several Wounds. In the Island of Chion, the Head of Moratay; they also slew the Priest, Simon Vaz; an Infidel rushing into his Chamber, broke in Pieces the Picture of the Blessed Virgin, he found there painted on a Board; but Heaven suffer’d him not to go unpunish’d, for his Hands drop’d off on the Spot, and he dy’d a few Days after. It was further observ’d, that within a Year there was not one left alive of all his Race, which was destroy’d in War, and by other Misfortunes and Calamities; as the last of them was fishing, a Needle Fish sprung out of the Water, and struck him with the Snout in the Eye, whereof he dyed. The whole Town perished miserably within a few Years. Tristan de Atayde soon receiv’d the News of this Slaughter of the Portugueses, and so successively of the others, throughout all the Islands. He encourag’d his Men, and labour’d to hide his Concern for being shut up among so many Enemies; he regulated the Distribution of Provisions; sent out several Spies, to get Information of the Enemies Motions and Designs: and order’d the Guard upon King Aerio, who was in the Fort, to be always watchful, for the more Security, leaving only the Nurses, and other Women that attended him. Then he again employ’d other Persons to propose a Peace to the Queen, and the King of Tydore, with ample Commission to offer advantageous Conditions, which were to be immediately perform’d; but all prov’d ineffectual, for an Accident which soon happen’d confirm’d the Enemies Obstinacy.

Catabruno, Governour of Gilolo, and Tutor to the Infant King, finding King of Tydore poison’d. his Usurpation establish’d by Time, and a good Disposition in the Minds of his Accomplices, poison’d the King; and possessing himself of the Palace and Forts, ascended the Throne, making the Subjects swear Allegiance to him. Tho’ no Man in all those Eastern Parts expected any other Event, yet was it look’d upon as most certain, that Tristan de Atayde was consenting to the Poisoning, and his Usurpation; besides other Circumstances produc’d so prove his Guilt, it was notorious, that Atayde sent Catabruno a Robe of blew Velvet, which he wore the Day he rebell’d, and was sworn King. God so order’d it, that as soon as he [43]was possess’d of the Kingdom, he broke his Faith with Tristan de Atayde, and confederated with the other United Princes, proving the greatest Enemy the Portugueses had; for he fitted out numerous Fleets wherewith he warr’d on all the Christians of those Islands, threatning and tormenting them that they might renounce their Faith.

At this time the Governour of India, tho’ there were some Troubles at Galvam sent to govern the Moluccos. Goa, and in other Places, sent Succours to Ternate, because it was towards the End of Summer, and one must of Necessity go to succeed the Governour. Antony Galvam was the Man appointed, who laid out above 10000 Ducats of his own towards restoring the Places that had been burnt, by which it may be truly said, he redeem’d the Moluccos. He was desirous, not only to People, but even to enlarge Ternate, and to this Purpose he treated with some poor marry’d Men, and needy Families, to go over with him and their Wives and Children to those Islands; the same he did with Men and Women, who were lewd Livers, that they might mend their Lives in another Country, and embrace the legal State of Matrimony; to which End, he lent them Money, and provided Necessaries for their Voyage. In the meanwhile, the Tyrant Catabruno, assembled his Forces, and mov’d against the City Momoya, where the Sangiack of it liv’d, who had been before an ignorant Idolater, but then a Christian Prince. He finding himself inferiour in Power, retired into a Fort, with his Wife, Children Momoya taken. and Family.

Some Portugueses sent him by Tristan de Atayde, not daring to trust themselves shut up there with him, withdrew into the Mountains, where they were soon kill’d, pursuant to the Edict of the League. Catabruno enter’d the City, without any Opposition, where he exercis’d his Cruelty, because the wretched Inhabitants would not quit it; and many new converted Christians recanted for Fear, or thro’ the Violence of Torments. Being Master of the City, he laid Seige to the Fort, giving it several furious Assaults, which Don John withstood, making a resolute Defence, and in some Sallies return’d Victorious; yet his Example prevailed Amazing Action of an Indian Convert. not on his People, as it usually does where it meets with generous Souls; so that this Prince soon discover’d how faint-hearted most of them were; he suspected that servile Fear would degenerate to such Baseness, that they would deliver him up to his Enemy, and therefore like a brave Man, he presently bent his Thoughts to secure the Salvation of his Soul. He knew Catabruno valu’d himself upon his Zeal for the Law of Mahomet, and therefore spar’d the Lives of all Christians that Apostatiz’d, putting to Death such as prov’d stanch and constant; he fear’d his Wife and Children, being pusilanimous, would fail in the Confession of their Faith, and being fill’d with this Spirit, drew his Cimiter, ran to them, and shedding Tears, which were not the Effect of Cowardice, slew them one after another, first telling them his Reasons for so doing, and that tho’ in the Eyes of the World he might appear inhumane, yet considering the Salvation of their Souls, what he did was a Religious Magnanimity, and therefore they ought rather to thank him for it. This was a mistaken Notion; and to go through stitch with it, he would, still persisting in the same Error, have kill’d himself, but that he was hinder’d by his own Servants, who to purchase the Tyrant’s Pardon, deliver’d up to him that Christian Prince, who had been so ill advis’d by his Zeal. Being brought [44]before Catabruno, who was inform’d how cruelly he had slain his Wife and Children, he ask’d him, Why he had undertaken so barbarous and inhumane an Action? Don John answer’d him with great Courage and Undauntedness. At that Time, and in my Thoughts, I had more regard to the Salvation of their Souls, than to the preserving of their Lives. I mistrusted His Words. the Sex, their Age, and your Torments, and would not hazard their persisting in the true Faith. Souls are Immortal, and I took nothing from my Children that they can feel the want of, or which Time, or your Sword would not have depriv’d them of; the latter we should all have been thankful to, as the Instrument of the Divine Will. But I much more dreaded your Pardon and Mercy, by which you might have perverted their Minds, with those Soothings which please frail Mortality. I being more resolute, tho’ expos’d to all your Fury, am so far from fearing the Effects, either of your Torments or Intreaties, that I shall look upon you as God’s Executioner, and were it his Will, that you should take away my Life, I should receive a greater Benefit from your Sword, than from your Mercy. Catabruno, enrag’d at his Answer, order’d him to be kill’d; but the Tyrant’s own Friends, who lov’d Don John, the Sangiack, carry’d him out of the Room, and contriv’d he should have his Liberty, and be restor’d. Their Intreaties prevail’d on Catabruno, and he liv’d many Years after in his own Dominions, with a Christian Constancy, confessing his indiscreet Zeal, which had caused his own Sword to deprive him of Wife and Children. A Mind truly worthy the best Part of Europe, and not to be the Product of the most remote barbarous Nations; and highly commendable, had it been directed by more solid Rules, to curb that Fierceness, so opposite to all natural and divine Laws, which looks upon such horrid Murders, as a Piece of Piety.


