---
heading: Book 6
linkTitle: Book 6
title: "Introduction"
description: "An alternative to a confederation is a federation which has a central ruler and legal system, making it stronger. Examples are the Dutch Republic (United Provinces) and the United States."
# date: 2019-09-14
date: 2022-04-19
image: "/photos/medieval/lapu.jpg"
author: Argensola
---


Gomez Perez builds 4 Galleys, and makes Slaves wrongfully.

In the mean while Gomez Perez, still carrying on his Preparations, conceal’d the Design, without sparing any charge for Shipping, Provisions, or Men. Among other Necessaries, he built four choice Galleys and for the manning of them, took a Method which was look’d upon as severe. 

He Order’d, That as many Indians who were Slaves to other Indians of Quality, as would serve to Man the Galleys, should be bought up, and Paid for by the Spaniards, who were Proprietors, out of their own Money; setting the Price of each Slave at two Taes in Gold, each Taes of Gold their Value. Tae being little above an Ounce, which was the Price Slaves had in former Times been valu’d at among them. He promis’d, that the Proprietors should afterwards be Refunded what they laid out, from the Kings Revenue.

Yet this did not seem to mollify the Rigour of the Order; because he improperly call’d those Indians Slaves, for their Lords use and love them like Children, set them at their own Tables, and Marry them to their Daughters; besides that, Slaves then were worth more Money. The Concern of those that were to be Sold, was attended by that of the Proprietors, who were to Discontent in the Philippines. contribute out of their Estates, to defray Charges they look’d upon as not very Necessary, and to Disgust their Vassals, by taking them away forcibly, being never likely to recover the Money they laid down, which they The Governors excuses. were well assur’d of. The Governour gave out, That those Galleys were to secure the Country, and defend it from the Danger that threatned; because he knew the Emperor of Japan was coming to Invade it, with a numerous Fleet; and that it could not be Defended without Galleys, and therefore it was absolutely Necessary to Man them with Slaves, since they had no others to Row. That these were not to be Fetter’d in the Galleys, nor Treated like Slaves, but so kindly used, that they themselves should prefer their Entertainment, before that of their Lords, whom they look’d upon as Parents, or Fathers-in-Law. [133]

These Allegations, and the absolute Necessity of defending themselves, The Design against the Moluccos takes Air. silenc’d both Parties; but could not stop the Mouth of Fame, for it was already known, what Engagements he made before he came from Spain, to the King, the Ministers, the Kindred, and Fomenters of the Expedition of Ternate, so that whatsoever he conceal’d, was divulg’d by uncertain Authors. However some advis’d him not to rely on the Chineses, or Sangleyes for the Defence of the Philippines; because no natural or civil Tye had ever gain’d, or attracted their Affection towards them. 

That he ought to remember the fresh Instance of what they did, when his Predecessor employ’d them, and consequently should be watchful over them. That he sending a Supply of Men, Ammunitions and Provisions to the Fort and Town of Cagayan, which is on the Coast of that Island of Luzon, 80 leagues from the City Manila, and there being then no Ship to send it in, Necessity pressing, he thought he might relieve that Want, by making use of one of the Chinese Ships that were then at Anchor in the Harbour, and clear’d in Order to return to China. He commanded the Falshood of the Chineses. Supply to be put aboard her, and the Chineses to carry, and in the Way, to land it where he directed, since it was no let to their Voyage; promising to requite and gratify them for that Service. They undertook it with extraordinary Tokens of good Will; but their Artifice appear’d by the Event, and show’d how Men that are upon the Watch, improve Opportunities. 

The Chineses set sail, and the second Day after, when the Spaniards were asleep, as believing themselves safe among trusty Friends, they fell upon them so unexpectedly, that they had not Time to stand upon their Guard, but were all murder’d and cast into the Sea. They plunder’d all they carry’d, and dividing the Spoil, sail’d for their own Country. They Spanish Woman abandon’d in China. only sav’d one unhappy Spanish Woman, that went with our Men, and took her along with them. 

They spar’d her Life, but after having insolently abus’d her, they set her ashore, in a Sea-Port Town of the first Part of China they made. She presently had Recourse to the Magistrates, whom she acquainted with the Villany those Men had committed, and the Wrongs they had done her; but tho’ favourably heard by those Judges, she had no Satisfaction for her Wrongs, nor could she obtain Justice. However they appointed Officers to carry her up the Country, remitting her to other Supream Magistrates. In this Journey, which was many Leagues, she endur’d more than she had done before, till some of the Governors taking Compassion on her and her Tears, carry’d her to the City of Macao, where the Portugueses reside, and set her at Liberty. Thus the whole Matter came to be known, and it was at Manila in the Mouths of all Men, who now magnify’d it, upon Occasion of the New Enterprize.

Chineses put into the Galleys. In short, all the Slaves demanded by the Governour Gomez Perez, were raised with much Trouble and Oppression, and in the same Manner they were put into the Galleys, where they continu’d some Time before they departed, and many of them dy’d, as not being us’d to that sort of Life. All those Slaves were not sufficient to Man the Galleys, and the Admiral Galley remain’d without Rowers. This, and the Necessity of finishing the Work produc’d a more rigorous Practice than the former. The Governour order’d that 250 of the Chineses, who resort to the Philippines to [134]Trade, should be taken to Man the Admiral Galley, and each of them to be allow’d two Pieces of Eight a Month, out of the King’s Revenue. He assur’d them, they should not be chain’d, but at Liberty, and with their Arms, to serve as Soldiers; and that they should only row in the Galleys when there was any Calm, and to weather some Capes. 

The Chineses being acquainted by their Chinese Governour with this Resolution, positively refus’d it, as an intolerable Burden. But our Governour pressing to bring about his Design, the Chinese assembled his People, to treat about the Affair, and contrive how 250 might be chosen out from among them all, threatning that he would take every Tenth Man out of their Houses. These Words provok’d them to such a Degree, that the next Day they shut up the very Windows of their Houses, and the Traders their Shops, and stopp’d the Provisions which run through their Hands. Our Governour seeing this Proceeding, and alledging that they mutiny’d, caus’d about 50 of those that came next to hand, to be seiz’d, and put to the Oar in the Galley. The others terrify’d by this Action, met, and drew from among them all, the 250, and because no Man would be of that Number, they divided 20000 Pieces of Eight among those that would comply, and gave every Chinese that would go in the Galley 80 Pieces of Eight, besides the King’s Pay. By Means of this good Encouragement, there was no Want of Chineses that listed themselves to row, but the 20000 Pieces of Eight were consum’d among them, or rather among the Officers. These 250 Chineses were form’d into five Companies, under five Chinese Christian Captains, who pass’d Musters and Reviews, with Pikes and Catanes, which differ little from Cymiters, and express’d Joy and Satisfaction.

Whilst these Things were in Agitation, Brother Gaspar Gomez came B. Gaspar Gomez brings Intelligence. to Manila, full of Intelligence, whereof he gave the Governour an Account, at several private Conferences. He said, the King of Ternate’s Affairs were in no ill Posture; tho’ somewhat weak’ned, by not agreeing with the Prime Men of his Kingdom; and that many of them threatned, they would Rebel, on Account of his Tyranny, and because he rais’d intolerable Taxes. That then, neither the Javaneses, nor the Lascarines, nor the Moors of Mecca frequented Ternate, as they had done at the Time when Captain Morones arriv’d there, under the Government of Santiago de Vera. He gave very particular Information concerning the two Forts of Talangame. That the King of Ternate had then about 3000 common Strength of Ternate. Soldiers, 1000 Musquetiers, and a great Number from his other Kingdoms. That they fought with Darts, Campilanes, or Cymiters, and Shields; and others had Coats of Mail, and Head-Pieces they got from the Portugueses, in exchange for Spice.

That they had Abundance of Ammunition, all of their own making, of the Materials the Javaneses brought to barter for Clove. That the Principal Place was the City Ternate, where the King and all his Court reside, and therefore it is best secur’d, and from thence all others are supply’d, supported, and encourag’d. How to be attack’d. He advis’d that our Men should assault it before Break of Day; because all Attacks made upon those People in the Morning Watch had been successful. 

That, if our Fleet came unexpected, it would certainly succeed; but that the said King had his Spies spread abroad in almost all those Islands, [135]as far as those of Canela, Sarvangan and Mindanao. That a good Number of Brass Sakers, and other great Guns might be brought in the Carcoas, from the Fort of Amboyna, and the Kings of Sian, and Tydore. That the People of Amboyna would send them upon Command, those of Sian and Tydore, upon very small Intreaty; because besides their owning the Crown of Spain, they are Enemies to Ternate. That the necessary Preparation for finishing the War, even in case the King of Tydore should fail, and it might be suspected he would not willingly see his Enemy utterly destroy’d, consisted in Artillery and Shipping, which was ready, and above 1200 Soldiers well arm’d, with their Coats of Mail and Head-Pieces, till they went over to the Island of Banda, to put in the necessary Garrison there.

### Light Vessels of good Use

There should be a Number of Light Vessels to take the Enemy flying; for by that Means the War would be quite concluded in a short Time, and without Bloodshed. That even the Malecontent Ternates declar’d, and publish’d as much, and own’d, that if a considerable Number of Fighting Men should come into their Country, they would all come in and submit without striking Stroke. Hence he inferr’d, that there were conceal’d Christians in the Molucco Islands. 

The Conquest of the whole Island of Banda, was very advantageous and profitable, and not hazardous, and that the Neighbourhood of Amboyna, which was ours, would be of great Consequence for maintaining it. He further affirm’d, That the Portugueses very much facilitated the Enterprize, and magnify’d the great Benefit it would be to his Majesty; and that F. Antony Marta, of whom the Governour had so great a Conceit, was of the same Opinion. Brother Gaspar Gomez added so many Circumstances to these particular Accounts, that he wholly inflam’d the Governour’s Heart.


#### King of Camboxa sends Spaniards Embassadors to the Governour. 

Landara, King of Camboxa, sent the Governour an Embassy by two Spanish Commanders, attended by many of his Subjects, with such Splendor as the Occasion of it requir’d. That barbarous King thought fit his Embassadors should not be natural born Subjects, because of the Occasion his People had given him to suspect their Fidelity. He chose them of Different Conditions, to the End that such Variety, the Diversity of Inclinations, and Opposition, might produce the better Effect. The one of them was a Portuguese, his Name James Veloso, the other a Spaniard, Blas Ruyz de Fernan Gonzalez.

They brought Gomez Perez a Magnificent Their Present. Present, a great Quantity of Ivory, Benjamin, China Ware, Pieces of Silk and Cotton, and an Elephant of a generous Temper, as afterwards appear’d by Experience. They deliver’d their Embassy, the Purport Subject of their Embassy. whereof was, to desire Succour against the King of Sian, who was marching against him of Camboxa, with a numerous Army; offering in Return for his Assistance to become subject to Spain, and embrace Christianity. That the King concluded, that so brave and gallant a Gentleman as Gomez Perez, would not on Account of any other Diversion refuse to perform an Action, which must redound so much to the Glory of God, and the Advantage of the Crown of Spain. The Governour receiv’d the Present, making a Return with another of some European Curiosities; and by way The Answer. of Answer, thank’d that King for the Confidence he had seem’d to place in him; but that, for the Present, he could not possibly afford the Succours, nor divert those Forces, which he was getting ready, to punish the King [136]of Ternate, and recover that Kingdom, and the rest of the Moluccos, which had Rebell’d, so much to the Dishonour of the Spanish Nation. That his Highness should place his Confidence in the Goodness of God, and persevere in the Design of serving him in his Holy and True Religion, and as soon as the Expedition of Ternate was over, he would convert his Forces to the Relief of Camboxa. The Embassadors were dismiss’d with these Hopes, which the Governours Son, Don Lewis de las Marinas, afterwards made good; and to give them entire Satisfaction, and justify the Delay, it was found necessary to make Publick the true Design of that Fleet, which till then had been kept secret.

Mighty Preparations against Ternate. The Governour, in fine, resolv’d to set forward, and endeavour’d to take along with him all the Men he could get. All were listed that could be prevail’d upon either by Force or Intreaties. The Proprietors and Soldiers were extravagantly expensive, upon the Ships, Provisions, and Gallantry; and the Philipines being well furnish’d with all Things, they did more than had been imagin’d, or could be in the Governour’s Power. 

He sent his Son Don Lewis, with all the Soldiers that were in Pay, to the Island of Zebu, where the Fleet was to rendevous, and there he continued six Months, waiting for new Orders. Gomez Perez stay’d at Manila, ordering Matters of great Moment. Two Days before his Departure, being invited by, and supping in the House of Peter de Rojas, his Lieutenant, where diverting himself with Gaming, and much Pleasure, he grew Prediction of ill Success. so merry, contrary to his Custom, and the Harshness of his Temper, that many interpreted it as a good Omen of his Success. He said in Discourse, that F. Vincent, of the Order of St. Francis, had told him, the Enterprize could not succeed, because the Army was made up of Men that were carry’d away by Force, and particularly the marry’d Men were so. 


He departed Manila on the 17th of October, with six Royal Galleys, one Galleon, one small Vessel call’d a Foist, one little Frigot, and several other Frigots, Carcoas, and Bireyes, which are another Sort of The Fleet sets out. Vessels of the Natives; all which, being part the Kings, and part belonging to Subjects, who offer’d to serve him with their Lives and Fortunes, amounted to an hundred. There were a Thousand Spaniards well arm’d; above four hundred Musquetiers of the Territory of Manila; a thousand more of those they call Visaias, Men arm’d with Lances, Shields, Its Force. 

Bows and Arrows, and above four hundred Chineses, of those that dwelt in the Island, besides a good Number of those that came to Trade taken into Pay; but many more Compell’d than Voluntiers. The Galleys carry’d Abundance of Provisions for the Army, over which he appointed his Son Don Lewis Perez, his Lieutenant, and sent him before, as has been said, with Orders to make for the Island of Zebu. He embark’d himself aboard the Admiral-Galley, which had twenty eight Benches for the Men to row, and was mann’d with the 250 Chineses for the Oar. Eighty Spaniards were put aboard it; they touch’d at Cabite, sail’d thence on the 19th, and with them some Vessels, in which there were private Persons, who follow’d at their own Expence, coasting the Island of Manila as far as Balajan. They parted, because the Vessels kept in Sight of Land, and the Governour put out to Sea. On the 25th he came alone to pass the Night, at the Point call’d de Azufre, or of Brimstone, in the Island of Manila, [137]opposite to that of Caza, where the Current, and the Drift of the Water from the Land run strong, and the Breezes then blowing, the Galley could not weather it. He anchor’d under the Shelter of it, and yet dragg’d a little with the Force of the Current. 

They made the Chineses row excessive Chineses at the Oars ill us’d. hard, to bring her up again under the Land. In short, they row’d very faintly, either because they were not us’d to that Labour, and forc’d to the Oar, or because they were then tir’d, and incens’d with the Command. Other contrary Winds darted up, which again obstructed their Voyage, and to weather some Points of Land, it was necessary to ply the Oars, and to vex the Crew, with the usual Severity and Punishment commonly inflicted aboard the Galleys. They thought this hard, and contrary to what the Governour had assur’d them, which was, that they should be kindly treated; but neither the Lash, nor the Threats, nor the stemming of the Currents, with the Vigour and Sweat of their Bodies, seem’d so The Governour threatens them. intollerable, and injurious to them, as to hear the angry and stern Governour himself bid them row manfully, for if they did not, he would put them in Chains, and cut off their Hair. This to the Chineses is an Affront that deserves Death, for they place their Honour in their Hair, which they cherish and preserve very fair, and value themselves upon it, as the Ladies in Europe us’d to do, all their Delight and Reputation being The Chineses rebel and kill the Spaniards. in keeping it curiously comb’d. Hereupon they resolv’d to mutiny, to prevent such an Affront and Contempt. The next Night, which was the 25th of October, being appointed for the Execution, when the tir’d Spaniards laid themselves down upon the Benches, and other convenient Places in the Vessel, the Chineses did so too, but cunningly dividing themselves, every one lay down by a Spaniard, pretending to be asleep. 

In the dead of the last Watch, which they thought the properest and safest Time, seeing the Spaniards sound asleep, the Chineses, upon hearing of a shrill Whistle, which was the Signal agreed upon between them, started up all together, and every Man with wonderful Celerity put on a white Vest, or Shirt, that they might know one another in the Height of their Fury, and the Darkness of the Night, and so distinguish where to make the Slaughter, tho’ for the more Security, they also lighted abundance of Wax-Candles, which they had conceal’d wrap’d up in those white Vests. 

Then they drew their Catanas, which are keener, and more crooked than our Cymiters, and began without any Noise every Man to hew his next Spaniard; so proceeding in their Fury, and killing all those that slept. Above 60 Persons had imbark’d in the Admiral-Galley, some of them being the Governour’s Servants, and other old Soldiers, who suffer’d Inconveniencies to oblige and divert him. They had play’d all the Night, and being tir’d, and the Heat very violent, they lay naked, some on the Gang-Way in the middle of the Galley, others on the Benches, and the greatest Favourites, who had more Room allow’d them, in the Poop, and to that Purpose the Governour retired into the Cabin.

The Chineses continu’d the Execution, on those who slept, without any Mistrust, which was done so expeditiously, that when some of those who slept in the Poop awak’d, the other Spaniards were all kill’d. The Watch heard nothing of it, tho’ there could be no Excuse for that Neglect, because there had been Instances and Warnings enough before. Others awak’d, and feeling themselves [138]wounded, in the Confusion leap’d into the Sea, where most of them Many of them drowned. Only 12 escape. were drown’d; some few cast themselves into the Sea before they were hurt, and were also swallow’d up by it, tho’ they were near Land, because the Current being strong, they could not stem it; twelve escap’d, and many Bodies were found along the Shores.

The Chineses now grown bold, drew out the Pikes they had hid under the Benches, and finish’d their Treacherous Work with Noise. 

The Governor, The Governor kill’d. who was under Deck, Sleeping, with a Candle and Lanthorn by him, Awak’d; and that he might do so, they made the greater Noise; and the Chineses themselves cry’d out to him, desiring he would come up to pacify a Quarrel there was among the Castillas, so they call the Spaniards. He, for this Reason, or believing the Galley dragg’d, as it had done at other times, getting up in his Shirt, and opening the Scuttle, look’d out, lifting half his Body above it: 

At the same time the Chineses fell upon him with their Cymiters, and wounded him Mortally, clutting his Head, and running him through with their Pikes in more than barbarous manner. Seeing his Death near he drew back, and took up the Prayer Book of his Order, which he always carry’d about him, and an Image of our Blessed Lady, and ended his life between those two Advocates, which were afterwards seen bathed in his Blood: Yet he dy’d not presently, for they afterwards found him in his Bed, imbracing the Image, where he Bled to Death, and about him the Bodies of Daniel Gomez de Leon, his Valet de Chamber, Pantaleon de Brito, Sucro Diaz, John de Chavez, Peter Maseda, John de S. Juan, Carrion Ponce, and Francis Castillo, all of them his Servants, and four brave Slaves, who had the same End. This was not known till it was Day; because none of the Chineses durst go down where the Governor was that Night, fearing least some of the 80 Spaniards that were in the Galley, had retir’d thither; such was the Dread of their own Guilt. None were left Two sav’d alive. alive in the Galley, but F. Francis Montilla, of the Barefoot Order of S. Francis, and John de Cuellar, the Governors Secretary, who lay under Deck, whether the fainthearted Chineses durst not go down in three Days, when their first Fury was over. Then they afterwards set Ashore, on the Coast of Ilocos, in the same Island of Luzon, that the Natives might suffer them to Water; and because the Frier and the Secretary had Capitulated, having their promise that they would do them no hurt, before they surrendered. The Chineses being satisfy’d that there were no more ancient Christians left, began to Shout and Roar for Joy that they had gone through with their Work, and had no Man more to stand in Awe of.

The Spaniards, who were in the other Vessels, near the Shore, tho’ they saw the Lights, and heard a confus’d Noise aboard the Admiral, thought it might be on account of some Work belonging to the Galley, or the like. The Chineses sail for China. When, a long time after, they understood how matters went, from those who sav’d themselves by Swimming, they lay still, not being able to redress it. They were but few; had not Strength enough; and the Mischief was done. They stay’d till Morning, and when Day appear’d, perceiv’d that the Galley had set her Shoulder-of-Mutton-Sail, and was standing for China, but they could not follow her; The Wind favouring, she sail’d all along the Coast of the Island, till they got clear of it, the Chineses all the way Celebrating their Victory. [139]

The two Prisoners beg an easy Death, and are promis’d their Lives. The Frier and the Secretary, who were among them, being fully perswaded they would soon kill them, and fearing it would be after some of their cruel Methods, holding up their Hands, begg’d they would allow them some Time to make their Peace with God; and in case they would put them to Death, that it might be by Beheading, and not any other Inhuman Way. One of the Chineses bid them not Fear, for they should not Dye. They all lay’d down their bloody Weapons, and prostrating themselves, return’d Thanks to Heaven in most humble manner, beating Drums, and ringing Bells they carry’d, according to their Custom. The two Christians being then bolted to a Bench in the Galley, during 15 Days their Captivity lasted, were fed with a small Proportion of Rice, boil’d in Water, without Salt, continually looking upon the Blood of their Companions that had been spilt, wherewith all the Deck was Stain’d. They shed Abundance of Tears on it, besides those they hourly let fall with the Apprehension of Death, those Chineses, like faithless false Men, designing to take away their Lives, in some strange manner.

They weigh’d, and sailed between the Islands of Mindanao and Luban, towards China, and Coasting along Manila towards Cagayan, some contrary Winds happening to blow, and Calms succeeding, they were much concern’d, fearing, that if the News of The Chineses invoke their Gods. their Treachery reach’d the Philippines, they would send after and overtake them. This Dread made them have recourse to their Gods, and call upon them, offering several sorts of Sacrifices, Perfumes, and Prayers, which the Devil often answer’d in formal Words, by the Mouths of such as were Possessed, whom he Enter’d to that Purpose, for there never wanted two or three such, all the time those Christians were in the Galley. What they saw was, that when least they thought of it, and on a sudden, the Person possessed began to quake, from Head to Foot. The others seeing him in that Condition, said, Some God was coming to Speak to them. Then coming up Some of them possess’d. to him, with Tokens of Respect, they unty’d, and spread abroad his Hair; and stripping him quite naked set him on his Feet, and he presently fell a Dancing to the Noise of some Drum, or Bell, they beat or rung. They put a Cymiter, or Spear into his Hand, and as he danc’d he brandish’d it over all their Heads, with no small danger of hurting them, which they were not the least apprehensive of; alledging, that their God, tho’ he did so, would never hurt them, without they were guilty of some Sin against him.

Before the Devil had possess’d any in the Galley, the Chineses were concerting Christians preserv’d by Means of the Devil. to murder the Christians, believing they were the Occasion, why God did not give them a fair Wind for their Voyage; but that watchful sovereign Providence, without whose Direction the least Accident does not happen, making Use of the Devil himself as an Instrument, prevented it by Means of those very Persons who offended it. The Person possess’d ask’d for Ink and Paper, which being presently brought him, he made certain Characters and confus’d Scrawls, which being expounded by the others in the Galley, they found signify’d, that those two Men were harmless, therefore they should not kill them, which was no small Incouragement to the Prisoners. However this lasted not long, for some others who were possess’d after the first, tormented them cruelly, especially one of them, who was the maddest. He told the Chineses, that if he should happen to hurt those Men, as he brandish’d the Weapon he had in his Hand over [140]them, making Essays, as if he cut and slash’d, then they must kill them immediately; because it would be a certain Sign, that their Gods requir’d it, and that their being in the Ship was the Occasion, why they gave them not a fair Gale. All the Men in the Galley assembled, to behold that Spectacle, and the Person possess’d having for a considerable Space walk’d about the Gang-Way, with extravagant Gestures, went then to the Place where the Religious Man and his Companion were; there growing hellishly inrag’d, he commanded all the rest to stand aside, and being left with only the two Prisoners, began to make hideous Faces and Grimaces at them, Horred practices upon the Prisoners. when getting upon the Table in the mid Part of the Galley, he thence threw his Cymiter at them, with such Fury, that it stuck in the Deck, between their Feet. Seeing he had not hurt nor touch’d them, he ask’d for it again to make a second and third Tryal, sticking it every Time so deep, that the others could scarce draw it out from the Planks. This done, he bid them give him a Partesan, with which he hack’d, hew’d, and thurst, in such frightful and dangerous Manner, that the Chineses themselves were astonish’d. He kept them above an hour in that Dread and Affliction, without daring to stir, or beg for Mercy; believing it would not avail them, but that on the contrary, whatsoever they could say might be prejudicial. Thus having plac’d all their Hopes, and Confidence on that sovereign Lord, who even when he delays does not fail to give Assistance, they call’d upon him, and offer’d themselves up to him in fervent Prayers; particularly the Religious Man, repeating some Psalms and Verses, which his former Devotion, excited by the present Danger, brought into his Mind, and were suitable to that Occasion, and such like Exigencies; by which, as he afterwards said, he receiv’d great Comfort, and Addition of Courage. This sort of miserable Life, and these Torments lasted all or most Days during therein Captivity.

The Chineses land, 820 of them are kill’d. At length, the Chineses perceiving they could not possibly perform the Voyage they desir’d, by Reason the Wind was contrary; they resolv’d to land on the Island of Ilocos, not far from Luzon, at the Port they call Sinay. They being there ashore to Water, the Natives knowing they had murder’d the Governour, laid an Ambush and kill’d twenty of them, and might have destroyed above eighty that had landed, if they had not wanted Courage; because at the very Shout the Men gave, when falling on, they were so daunted, that they all fled several Ways in Confusion, throwing down their Arms, endeavouring to save their Lives, by leaping into the Sea, so to get off in the Boat. The Chineses meeting with this Disaster, and thinking one of their own Men had been the Occasion of it, because he advised them to put into that Port, they resolv’d to seize and put him They drown one of their own Men. to Death. They did as had been resolv’d, and at Night, by unanimous Consent, threw him into the Sea, then weighing their Anchors, they got out of that Harbour, and put into another, three Leagues off, on the same Coast. There the Devil entering into one of them, as he us’d to do, commanded them immediately to return to the Port, where they had sustain’d that Loss of their Friends and Companions, and that they should not depart thence, till they had sacrific’d a Man to him, without appointing which he would have. They immediately obey’d the Command, one of the Chief Chineses making Choice of one of the Christian Indians of the Philippines [141]they had Prisoners, to be Sacrifiz’d, and ty’d his Hands and Feet, stretching them on a Cross, which they rais’d up, and the Christian being bound against the fore-Mast, one of those possess’d by the Devil came up An Indian cruelly Sacrifiz’d. to him in Sight of them all, and playing the part of an Executioner, ripp’d up his Breast, with one of those Daggers they use, making a wound so large, that he thrust in his Hand with ease, and pluck’d out part of his Entrals, whereof, with horrid Fury, he bit a Mouthful, and casting the rest up into the Air, eat what he had in his Mouth, and lick’d his Hands, pleasing himself with the Blood that stuck to them.

They cast him into the Sea. Having committed the Murder, they took the Cross, and him that was on it, and cast it and the Martyr into the Sea, which receiv’d that Body, offer’d in Sacrifize to the Devil, then to be cloath’d in Glory, by him that has provided it for those who suffer for the Confession of the Faith. This dreadful Spectacle struck Horror, and rais’d Emulation in the two Christians, who beheld it with Zeal, and had expected as much before. The Inhuman Sacrifice being over, they put out of the Harbour, and having for some days Coasted the Island with Difficulty; one of them, by command of the Possess’d Person, who had order’d the Sacrifice, with the consent The Secretary and Frier set at Liberty. of them all, set at liberty the Religious Man, the Secretary, and all the Indians they had Prisoners, putting them ashore in the Boat, and then the Chineses stood out to Sea. They endeavour’d to make over to China, but not being able, put into Cochinchina, where the King of Tunquin took all they had, and among the rest two heavy Pieces of Cannon, that had been put aboard for the Expedition of the Moluccos, the King’s Standard, and all the Jewels, Goods, and Money. He suffer’d the Galley to perish on the Coast, and the Chineses dispers’d, flying into several Provinces. Others affirm, that King seiz’d and punish’d them.

Spaniards that escapd came to Manila. The Spaniards that escap’d, went to carry the News to Manila, where some griev’d, and others, who hated the Governour for his Severity, rejoyced; but that ill Will soon vanish’d, and all generally lamented him; more especially when some of the Bodies were found and brought in. Among them were those of the Ensign, John Diaz Guerrero, an old Soldier, and Governour of Cebu; of the Ensign Penalosa, Proprietor of Pila; the great Soldier Sahagun, whose Wife ran roaring about the City; Bodies found. of Captain Castano, newly come over from Spain; of Francis Rodriguez Perulero; of Captain Peter Neyla; of John de Sotomayer; of Simon Fernandez; that of his Sergeant; of Guzman; of the Ensign and Sergeant of the Company brought by Don Philip de Samano, who being sick transferr’d it to Captain John Xuarez Gallinato; and those of Sebastian Ruis and Lewis Velez, these two Merchants, all the rest old Soldiers; whose Funerals renew’d the Sorrow for that dismall Accident.

Rojas chose Governour by the City. This News being brought to Manila, and no Papers of the Governour’s appearing, wherein he nam’d, who was to succeed him, tho’ it was known he had the King’s Order so to do, believing it might be lost in the Galley, among much of the Kings, his own, and private Persons Goods, the City therefore chose the Licentiate Rojas for their Governour, and he was so forty Days. But the Secretary John de Cuellar returning to Manila, in a miserable Condition, with F. Francis de Montilla, gave Notice, that Gomez Perez, before his Departure had appointed his Son Don Lewis to succeed, and that this would be found at the Monastery of S. Augustin, in a Box, [142]Don Lewis das Marinnas Governor. among other Papers, in the Custody of F. James Munnoz. Rojas had already sent Orders to Cebu, for all the People employ’d in the Expedition, to return, as was accordingly done. So that Don Lewis coming, not withstanding some Protestations, he, by Virtue of his Father’s Authority, succeeded him in the Government, till Don Francis Tello came.

Character of Gomez Perez. Such was the End of that Gentleman, whose Actions were valuable in themselves, and the more for the Zeal he did them with. He wanted not for political and martial Virtues, nor for Prudence in both Sorts; but he would not regard Examples; and contrary to what those taught him, durst promise himself to succeed, so that he became confident, if not rash. But his Christian Piety makes Amends for all.

Don Lewis, his Kindred and Friends, would fain have prosecuted the Expedition The Fleet dismiss’d. to the Moluccos, and to this End F. Antony Fernandez came from Tydore; but he succeeded not. The Fleet was dismiss’d, and it was a singular Providence for the Security of the Philippine Islands; for presently after, at the Beginning of the Year 1594, there came thither a great Number of Ships from China, loaded only with Men and Arms, and bringing no Merchandize, as they are wont to do. Those Ships brought seven Mandarines, being some of the chief Viceroys and Governours of the Provinces. It was believ’d, and Arm’d Chineses in the Philippines. prov’d certainly true, that they knowing Gomez Perez went upon that Expedition, to which he took with him all the Spaniards, concluded the Country was left defenceless, and therefore came with a Design to Conquer, or plunder it, which would have been very easy, had they found it as they expected. They went out of their Ships but twice to visit Don Lewis, with great State, and much Attendance. He receiv’d them affectionately, and presented every Mandarine with a gold Chain. They told him, they came by their King’s Order, to pick up the Chineses, who wander’d about those Islands without his Leave; but this was look’d upon as a meer Pretence; because there was no Need, for that Effect, of so many Mandarines, nor such a Number Mandarines visit Don Lewis. of Vessels arm’d and furnish’d for War. The Chineses who murder’d Gomez Perez, were of Chincheo, and therefore Don Lewis, as knowing the certain Criminals, sent his Kinsman Don Ferdinand de Castro, in a Ship, to give the King of China an Account of that Treachery; but his Voyage miscarry’d, and all was left in Suspence.

King of Camboxa demands the promis’d Succour. At this Time Langara, King of Camboxa made Instance for the Succours, and requir’d Don Lewis to perform his Fathers Promise made to him not long before. He therefore, in Pursuance to it, and to the End that those Forces, or some Part of them, might continue in the Church’s Service, since they were provided for that End, in the Design of Ternate, resolv’d to support that King with them.

